# Water heaters - infographic

View or share this convenient graphic.

For more information on water heaters, see [our product profile](http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/products/categories/water-heaters/13735).

[Download PDF, 224 KB](/sites/nrcan/files/energy/pdf/energystar/Water%20Heater%20Infographic_e_acc.pdf)

---

## Text version of Infographic

### UPGRADE YOUR WATER HEATER NOW AND SOAK UP THE SAVINGS!

**Protect your hot water supply! Dont get stuck in the cold.**
**If your water heater is more than 10 years old, upgrade to an ENERGY STAR certified model!**

1.  **SAVE ENERGY**
    *   Homes use about 75 litres of hot water every day!
    *   Water heaters are the 2nd-highest energy user in the home.
    *   The energy used to heat our water could power 1 in 5 Canadian households.
    *   ENERGY STAR certified models save energy without compromising performance.

2.  **CHOOSE THE RIGHT MODEL**
    *   **ENERGY STAR certified tankless water heater**:
        *   Uses **30% less energy** than a storage tank
        *   Saves space in your home
        *   Heats water only when it is needed
    *   **ENERGY STAR certified gas-fired storage tank:**
        *   Most common in existing homes
        *   Constantly heats water in the tank, using energy when it is not always needed
        *   Uses **14% less energy** than a standard storage tank
    *   *Note: Electric-resistance storage tank water heaters are not eligible for ENERGY STAR certification.*
    *   **ENERGY STAR certified electric heat pump water heater:**
        *   Uses **50% less energy** than a standard electrical storage tank heater
        *   Takes heat from the surrounding inside air or outside air and transfers it to the water tank.
    *   **ENERGY STAR certified solar water heater:**
        *   Uses up to **60% less energy** than other water heaters
        *   Has a longer life expectancy than others
        *   Generally designed for use with electric or gas storage backup water heaters

3.  **SIZE MATTERS**
    *   Bigger isnt always better; consult a professional to choose the right size.

4.  **MAINTENANCE and INSTALLATION**
    *   Get 3 quotes from licensed professionals before you buy.
    *   Have a qualified professional service your water heater regularly.

5.  **CONSERVE!**
    *   Think about how you use hot water and reduce your consumption.

Learn more at [energystar.gc.ca](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada).

The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are administered and promoted in Canada by Natural Resources Canada and are registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.