# Split-system central air conditioners

## Energy Efficiency Regulations

### Regulatory definition
**Split-system central air conditioner**: A single-phase or three-phase central air conditioner that is a split-system with a cooling capacity of less than **19 kW (65,000 Btu/h)**.

### Compliance date
-   Manufactured on or after **January 1, 2023**, for split system single-phase central air conditioner.
-   Manufactured on or after **January 1, 2026**, for three-phase split system central air conditioner.
-   *For models manufactured prior, refer to the Regulations.*

### Compliant product models
-   [Split-system central air conditioners, single-phase](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=AC.SplitSystemSingle) as listed on NRCans searchable database.
-   [Split-system central air conditioners, three-phase](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=AC.SplitSystemThree) as listed on NRCans searchable database.

### Testing standard
-   **10 C.F.R. Appendix M1** for single-phase models.
-   **10 C.F.R. Appendix F1** for three-phase models.

### Energy efficiency standard

#### Energy performance standard for split-system air conditioners and heat pumps under 19 kW (65,000 Btu/h)

**Single Phase**

| Energy-using product                                                                            | Energy performance standard                   |
| :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------------------------- |
| **Split-system central air conditioners, other than those that are space-constrained or small-duct and high-velocity** | SEER 2  13.4<br>Off mode power consumption  30 W |
| **Split-system central air conditioners that are small-duct and high-velocity**                 | SEER 2  12.0<br>Off mode power consumption  30 W |
| **Split-system central heat air conditioners, other than those that are space-constrained**     | SEER 2  11.7<br>Off mode power consumption  30 W |

**Three-Phase**

| Energy-using product                                                          | Energy performance standard |
| :---------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| **Split-system central air conditioners, other than those that are small-duct and high-velocity** | SEER  13.4                 |
| **Split-system central air conditioners that are small-duct and high-velocity** | SEER  13.0                 |
| **Split system central air conditioners that are space-constrained**          | SEER 2  12.7               |

*Seasonal energy efficiency ratio (2)  the total cooling of a central air conditioner or heat pump in Btu during its normal annual usage period for cooling, divided by the electric power usage in watt-hours during the same period as determined in accordance with 10 C.F.R. Appendix M1/10 C.F.R. Appendix.*

-   **Btu/h**: British thermal units per hour
-   **kW**: kilowatts
-   **W**: watts

### Energy efficiency report requirements
-   **Name of product**
-   **Brand name**
-   **Model number**
-   **Manufacturer**
-   **Name of the certification body** or province whose verification mark will be on the product or its package.
-   Whether a **mathematical model** as defined in the Regulations was used to generate any of the information provided below.
-   **Air-Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI) classification type**.
-   **Type**
    -   Split system, other than space-constrained or small-duct and high-velocity.
    -   Small-duct and high-velocity split-system.
    -   Space-constrained split-system.
-   **Type of split system**
    -   Single split system (non-ducted).
    -   Single split system (ducted).
    -   Multi-Head Mini-Split (all non-ducted).
    -   Multi-Head Mini-Split (all ducted).
    -   Multi-Head Mini-Split (mixed-ducted and non-ducted).
    -   Multi-Split, Multi-Circuit (all non-ducted).
    -   Multi-Split, Multi-Circuit (all ducted).
    -   Multi-Split, Multi-Circuit (mixed-ducted and non-ducted).
-   **Off mode power consumption**, in watts (single-phase).
-   **Phase of electric current**.
-   **Cooling capacity** in kW (Btu/h).
-   **Seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER 2)**.

*Sign in to the [Compliance Regulatory Energy Efficiency Database](https://energy-reporting-rapports-energetiques.canada.ca/creed/s/) (CREED) to download and submit an energy efficiency report for this product.*

*This document does not constitute part of the Energy Efficiency Act (Act) or its associated regulations. This document is an administrative document that is intended to facilitate compliance by the regulated party with the Act and its associated regulations. This document is not intended to provide legal advice regarding the interpretation of the Act or its associated regulations. If a regulated party has questions about their legal obligations or responsibilities under the Act or its associated regulations, they should seek the advice of legal counsel.*