# Energy Benchmarking: The Basics

How much energy your buildings use should matter to you. If you can measure it, you can control it. If you can control it, you can manage it.

The job of an energy manager can be challenging. Implementing an energy benchmarking routine can make the job easier and assist decision-makers in making wise decisions on energy consumption. This will help determine if a building's energy performance is improving or deteriorating, and quickly identify effective improvements.

More than **13,000 Canadian buildings** use Natural Resources Canadas adaptation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's **ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager** tool to understand their energy performance and the effectiveness of energy efficiency initiatives.

## Join the energy benchmarking movement today!

Natural Resources Canada is leading a **national energy benchmarking initiative** for the commercial and institutional buildings sector. This allows building owners and managers to compare their buildings energy consumption against equivalent buildings to make informed decisions.

***Its time for the Canadian buildings sector to take advantage of Portfolio Manager to implement energy benchmarking as an energy management best practice.***

- **What is building energy benchmarking?**
- **The benefits of benchmarking**
- **Barriers to energy benchmarking**

## What is building energy benchmarking?

Building energy benchmarking is the **ongoing review of your organization's energy consumption** to determine if your building's energy performance is getting better or worse. It can be an internal process (comparing against past performance or other buildings in your portfolio) or an external process (comparing to similar buildings outside your organization).

Regular energy benchmarking provides **hard data** that encourages continuous improvement. By making it a routine practice, you can:

- Identify poorly performing buildings.
- Establish a **baseline** for measuring improvement in energy consumption for all buildings.
- Enhance and create competition through comparison with like buildings.
- Participate in green building certification programs and various other environmental initiatives.

## The benefits of benchmarking

Superior energy management offers a significant competitive advantage. Millions of dollars are wasted annually by energy-inefficient buildings. Energy benchmarking is a proven strategy that can **positively and relatively quickly impact your bottom line**.

Energy benchmarking:

- Provides **objective, reliable information** on energy use and the benefits of improvements.
- Increases general **awareness of energy efficiency** among building occupants, potentially changing behaviour.
- Prioritizes poorly performing facilities for **immediate improvement**.
- Identifies **best practices** that can be replicated within a building or across a portfolio.
- Establishes **reference points** for measuring and rewarding good performance.
- Helps develop a **comprehensive energy management action plan** and build a business case for capital investments (retrofits).
- Leads to **savings** that will lower energy costs while maintaining or increasing profit margins.

Benchmarking helps identify key metrics and drivers of energy use, making it an essential tool for improving energy performance.

## Barriers to energy benchmarking

Perceived barriers can discourage organizations from starting energy benchmarking. Here are common barriers and tips to overcome them:

- **Limited understanding of the benefits of energy benchmarking**:
  - Many resources are available on how energy benchmarking provides a competitive advantage and manages energy consumption. See \"The Benefits of benchmarking\", visit the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's [ENERGY STAR Benchmarking Starter Kit](http://www.energystar.gov/buildings/facility-owners-and-managers/existing-buildings/use-portfolio-manager/get-started-benchmarking), or email [info.services@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:info.services@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca).
- **Lack of senior management support**:
  - Gain senior management support by demonstrating how benchmarking aligns with the organization's mandate. For tips, visit the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's [Engage upper management](https://www.energystar.gov/buildings/facility-owners-and-managers/industrial-plants/make-business-case/engage-upper-management).
- **Inaccessibility of energy consumption data**:
  - Consult your utility, energy service provider, or utility bill aggregator for help collecting data. They may offer services for [data exchange](https://nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada/energy-star-for-buildings/data-exchange-energy-star-portfolio-manager-web-services/3751#a1) or provide historical energy and water consumption data.
- **Limited understanding of how to interpret/use energy benchmarking data**:
  - Benchmarking tools often generate easy-to-understand summary reports. Consult:
    - [Benchmarking training resources](https://nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada/energy-star-for-buildings/energy-benchmarking-training-resources/3769)
    - [Building energy benchmarking resources](https://nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada/energy-star-for-buildings/building-energy-benchmarking-resources/3753)
    - [Energy management training](https://nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/buildings/energy-management-resources-buildings/energy-management-training/22466)
    - Or email [info.services@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:info.services@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca).
- **Limited time and/or resources**:
  - While benchmarking requires resources, there are ways to [minimize initial investment](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/buildings/energy-benchmarking-basics/16828#a1) and get started. Establishing a routine may take less time than expected.

Overcoming these barriers is worthwhile once the value of energy benchmarking is recognized. For more information, [contact us](http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/commercial/contact-us.cfm).

*TIP: Read [8 Energy Benchmarking Hurdles (and How to Get Over Them)](http://www.buildings.com/article-details/articleid/6208/title/8-energy-benchmarking-hurdles-and-how-to-get-over-them.aspx) (Buildings Magazine).* 