# Buying and operating tipscooking appliances

## What should you consider when buying a cooking appliance?

### Buying tips

*   **Read the EnerGuide label.**
    *   Choose a model with the **lowest energy consumption rating**.
*   **Look for a self-cleaning oven.**
    *   These models use heat in the cleaning cycle, but they are also better insulated and maintain the internal temperature better.
*   **Ask about ovens with a convection setting.**
    *   They can reduce baking time by up to 30 percent.
*   **Consider an oven with probes for measuring internal temperatures.**
    *   These models prevent overcooking food and reduce the need to open the door during cooking to check temperatures; both practices waste energy.
*   **Choose an induction or halogen (ceramic glass) cooktop.**
    *   This type is more energy efficient than conventional burners.
*   **Purchase the right size oven.**
    *   A smaller model will use less energy.

### Operating tips

*   **Read the owner's manual.**
    *   It will provide tips to ensure that your specific model is operating as efficiently as possible.
*   **Preheat the oven only for baking.**
    *   In other cases, preheating is a waste of energy.
*   **Turn off the oven a few minutes early.**
    *   The remaining heat will finish the job.
*   **Keep the oven door shut whenever possible.**
    *   Every time it's opened during use, as much as 20 percent of the heat escapes.
*   **Use the right size cookware.**
    *   A pot should just cover the cooking ring for maximum efficiency.
*   **Use the right type of cookware.**
    *   For example, aluminum pans are unsuitable for halogen induction cooktops.
*   **Use only smooth, flat-bottomed cookware.**
    *   Food cooks faster when pots make full contact with the cooking element.
*   **Use minimal heat.**
    *   Once water is boiling, choose the lowest setting required to maintain the boil.
*   **Keep drip pans clean under conventional burners.**
    *   Lining the pans with aluminum foil may seem like a good solution, but foil reflects heat that can damage the element.
*   **Keep oven door seals clean and tight.**
    *   If a sheet of paper placed in the door slides around or slips out, or if light from a flashlight placed inside can be seen through the seals, replace the seals. (Use the flashlight test on fridge and freezer doors too.)