# Freezers

An **ENERGY STAR certified freezer** uses **10% less energy**, on average, than a standard model. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

## Benefits of ENERGY STAR certified freezers

*   **Manual defrost freezers** use half the energy of automatic defrost models, but must be defrosted periodically to achieve energy savings.
*   A **chest freezer** is usually more energy efficient, since the door opens from the top and allows less cold air to escape.
*   **Advanced insulation and compressors** mean today's freezers consume much less energy.

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict [efficiency specifications](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/technical-specifications) and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

Start your research [using the ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool to find and compare](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-residential-freezers/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) certified freezers *(You will be redirected to the U.S. ENERGY STAR website)*.

## Why should you choose ENERGY STAR?

*   **Reduce your at-home energy consumption**
*   **Save money**
*   **Keep your home comfortable**
*   **Reduce your carbon footprint**

## Tips for choosing an energy efficient freezer

*   When choosing between similar models, take a close look at the [EnerGuide label](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/appliances-energuide) to learn how much energy theyll use each year and over the lifetime of the product. And remember the lower the number the better!
*   Freezers that have earned the [ENERGY STAR Most Efficient](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/energy-star-most-efficient) designation are the best of the best  theyll save you more energy than standard models.

## How to use your freezer efficiently

*   **Buy the right size freezer.** Estimate **130 L (4.5 cu. ft.)** of capacity per person in your home. Buying too big means cooling unused space; buying too small means overfilling the space and overworking the cooling system.
*   **Give your freezer some space.** Place the freezer at least **5 to 7 cm (2 to 3 in.)** from the wall to provide adequate airflow, letting heat from the motor and compressor to move away from the freezer and allowing the cooling system to work efficiently.
*   If you have a manual defrost freezer, read your owners manual to find out how often it should be defrosted.

## Regulations set the energy efficiency minimum

Freezers are subject to Canada's *Energy Efficiency Regulations*, which set a minimum performance standard for their energy efficiency. Find details in the [Guide to the Regulations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/guide-canada-s-energy-efficiency-regulations).

## Related Blog Posts

*   [Recipes for energy savings in your kitchen](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/recipes-energy-savings-your-kitchen)
*   [Five energy-efficiency myths debunked](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/five-energy-efficiency-myths-debunked)
*   [Use your dishwasher more efficiently for big savings](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/use-your-dishwasher-more-efficiently-big-savings)

---

*The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.*