# Windows, doors and skylights

Windows, doors, and skylights can be a significant source of energy loss in your home  **up to 25%**. In Canadas climate, this means higher energy bills.

## Choosing energy efficient models can help you reduce your energy use

*   **Windows:** ENERGY STAR certified windows are about **20% more energy efficient** than the average window.
*   **Doors:** ENERGY STAR certified doors are about **15% more efficient**.
*   **Skylights:** ENERGY STAR certified skylights are about **35% more efficient**.
*   **ENERGY STAR Most Efficient windows and sliding glass doors:** These are the best of the best - **up to 55% more energy efficient** than average models.

### Look for the ENERGY STAR symbol

ENERGY STAR is the mark of high-efficiency products in Canada. The familiar symbol makes it easy to identify the best energy performers on the market. ENERGY STAR certified products meet strict [technical specifications](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/technical-specifications) for energy performance  tested and certified.

## Dont forget about installation

A poorly installed window, door, or skylight may cause condensation, cold drafts, or even allow water to leak into your home. The damage water causes is usually invisible until it is very costly to fix.

If possible, choose a company that is in the [**Window Wise**](http://sawdac.com/Window-Wise.htm) certification program. This quality assurance program trains installers to install windows and doors correctly.

### Before you go shopping:

*   See if there are any rebates or incentives available using our [ENERGY STAR Canada rebates and incentives](https://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/products/energystar/why-buy/programs.cfm?max=10&pageId=1&categoryID=all&regionalDeliveryId=all&sectoranditems=all%7C0&keywords=) directory.
*   Discover [key features and helpful tips](/energy-efficiency/key-features-helpful-tips-windows-doors-skylights) for your fenestration products.
*   Explore a list of ENERGY STAR participating [manufacturers](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/windows-doors-skylights-manufacturers-energy-star-canada-participants), [dealers and installers](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/retailersdealers#win) that supply ENERGY STAR certified windows, doors, and skylights in Canada.
*   Find ENERGY STAR certified models on our [searchable product list](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/).
*   See sample ENERGY STAR [labels](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/sample-labels-windows-doors-skylights).
*   Learn more about [condensation](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/condensation).
*   Be aware of the energy performance [ratings and certification](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/ratings-certification) for windows, doors, and skylights.
*   Explore the factors affecting energy efficiency by [reading the technology primer](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/technology-primer) for windows, doors, and skylights.

### Find out more about fenestration products as a manufacturer or dealer:

*   [Windows, doors and skylights for manufacturers and dealers](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/manufacturersdealers-windows-doors-skylights)
*   [Learn more about joining ENERGY STAR Canada as a fenestration manufacturer](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/contact-information)

## Related blog posts

*   [Buyers guide when shopping for windows and doors](/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/buyer-s-guide-when-shopping-windows-doors)
*   [Choosing energy-efficient windows in four easy steps](/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/choosing-energy-efficient-windows-four-easy-steps)
*   [Hammer down on energy use through these home improvements](/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/hammer-down-energy-use-through-these-home-improvements)

*The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.*