# Heat pump water heaters

**May 2024**

## Technical bulletin on developing the standards

**Webinar**: Wednesday, June 5, 1:00-2:30 pm EDT

In April 2024, the Office of Energy Efficiency at Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) updated its [Forward Regulatory Plan](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/node/21709#msdynttrid=gPrvBKD4QnHLNydHNDucp-nQokQOZTaBRJIp6V7eiWk) which identifies its intention to amend Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations* (the Regulations) to introduce heat pump water heaters as a new energy-using product, including energy efficiency and testing standards, to harmonize with the United States.

This technical bulletin has been released to initiate the consultation process and to collect stakeholder views on the requirements being considered for heat pump water heaters.

Input received during this stage of the process will inform the development of the next amendments considered. In addition, NRCan will undertake a cost-benefit analysis using the best-available Canadian market data to assess the economic and environmental impacts of these new standards and to ensure Canadian consumers and businesses benefit from their implementation.

The Government of Canada intends to pre-publish a regulatory proposal in the *Canada Gazette*, Part I, in 2025.

## Background

Heat pump water heaters are not currently defined as an energy-using product in the Regulations.

Water heaters use a significant portion of building energy consumption. The energy efficiency standards for heat pump water heaters would facilitate energy savings and reduced energy costs for Canadians. Heat pump water heaters are more efficient than conventional alternatives, and standards encourage manufacturers and consumers to adopt efficient product designs.

In 2021, NRCan and the United States Department of Energy (U.S. DOE) signed the [*Memorandum of Understanding Between the Department of Natural Resources of Canada and the Department of Energy of the United States of America Concerning Cooperation on Energy*](https://nrcan.canada.ca/energy/resources/international-energy-cooperation/memorandum-understanding/23749), which acknowledges that both countries will collaborate on new and updated energy efficiency and testing standards where feasible and appropriate.

On May 6, 2024, the U.S. DOE published a [Final Rule Pertaining to Standards for Consumer Water Heaters](https://www.regulations.gov/document/EERE-2017-BT-STD-0019-1426?utm_medium=email&utm_source=govdelivery), which includes updated energy efficiency standards for household heat pump hot water heaters.

NRCan is considering amending the Regulations to harmonize household heat pump water heater requirements with the energy efficiency standards and testing standards of the U.S. DOE.

NRCan is also considering amending the Regulations to harmonize with the testing standard of the U.S. DOE for commercial heat pump water heaters. No energy efficiency standards are under consideration for commercial heat pump water heaters.

## Product description

A **heat pump water heater** is being considered to be defined in the Regulations as a heat pump-type unit which utilizes electricity to heat potable water for use outside the heater upon demand and is a product designed to transfer thermal energy from one temperature level to a higher temperature level for the purpose of heating water, including all ancillary equipment such as fans, storage tanks, pumps, or controls necessary for the device to perform its function.

A **household heat pump water heater** is being considered to be defined as a heat pump water heater having a maximum current rating equal to or less than **24 amperes** at a voltage no greater than **250 volts** and an effective storage volume ** 76 L (20 U.S. gal)** and ** 454 L (120 U.S. gal)**.

A **commercial heat pump water heater** is being considered to be defined as a heat pump water heater having a maximum current rating greater than **24 amperes** or a voltage greater than **250 volts**. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, air-source heat pump water heaters, water-source heat pump water heaters, and direct geo-exchange heat pump water heaters.

**A split-system heat pump water heater** is being considered to be defined as a heat pump water heater in which at least the compressor, which may be installed outdoors, is separate from the storage tank.

A **unitary heat pump water heater** is being considered to be a factory-packaged heat pump water heater. It does not include a split-type heat pump water heater.

A **small heat pump water heater** is being considered to be a household heat pump water heater having an effective storage volume ** 76 L (20 U.S. gal)** and ** 133 L (35 U.S. gal)** and a first-hour rating **< 193 L (51 U.S. gal)**.

The categories of household heat pump water heaters being considered are based on effective storage volume, first-hour rating, and draw pattern (see Table 1).

### Table 1: Categories of household heat pump water heaters being considered

| Product                           | Effective Storage Volume, Litres (U.S. Gallons) | First-Hour Rating, Litres (U.S. Gallons) | Draw Pattern |
| :-------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------- | :--------------------------------------- | :----------- |
| Household Unitary Heat Pump Water Heaters |  76 L (20 gal) and  208 L (55 gal)            |  0 L (0 gal) and < 68 L (18 gal)        | Very Small   |
|                                   |                                                 |  68 L (18 gal) and < 193 L (51 gal)     | Low          |
|                                   |                                                 |  193 L (51 gal) and < 284 L (75 gal)    | Medium       |
|                                   |                                                 |  284 L (75 gal)                         | High         |
| Household Unitary Heat Pump Water Heaters | > 208 L (55 gal) and  454 L (120 gal)          |  0 L (0 gal) and < 68 L (18 gal)        | Very Small   |
|                                   |                                                 |  68 L (18 gal) and < 193 L (51 gal)     | Low          |
|                                   |                                                 |  193 L (51 gal) and < 284 L (75 gal)    | Medium       |
|                                   |                                                 |  284 L (75 gal)                         | High         |

### Testing standard

NRCan is considering referencing the following testing standard for **household heat pump water heaters**, using an ambulatory incorporation by reference (as amended from time to time):

-   [**Appendix E to Subpart B of Part 430, Title 10**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/part-430/appendix-Appendix E to Subpart B of Part 430) to the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, entitled *Uniform Test Method for Measuring the Energy Consumption of Water Heaters*.

Additionally, NRCan is considering referencing the following testing standard for **commercial heat pump water heaters**, using an ambulatory incorporation by reference (as amended from time to time):

-   [**Appendix E to Subpart G of Part 431, Title 10**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/part-431/appendix-Appendix E to Subpart G of Part 431) to the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, entitled *Uniform Test Method for the Measurement of Energy Efficiency of Commercial Heat Pump Water Heaters*.

### Energy efficiency standard

The energy efficiency standards under consideration for household heat pump water heaters are summarized in Table 2 below, with the intent to harmonize with the U.S. DOE. These energy efficiency standards would be incorporated into the Regulations by referencing the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, as amended from time to time.

### Table 2: Energy efficiency standards for heat pump water heaters being considered

| Product                                                     | Effective Storage Volume, Litres (U.S. Gallons) | Draw Pattern | Minimum Required Uniform Energy Factor (UEF) | Period of Manufacture |
| :---------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------- | :----------- | :------------------------------------------- | :-------------------- |
| Household Heat Pump Water Heaters, except for small heat pump water heaters |  76 L (20 gal) and  208 L (55 gal)            | Very Small   | UEF  2.30                                   | On or after May 6, 2029 |
|                                                             |                                                 | Low          |                                              |                       |
|                                                             |                                                 | Medium       |                                              |                       |
|                                                             |                                                 | High         |                                              |                       |
| Household Heat Pump Water Heaters                           | > 208 L (55 gal) and  454 L (120 gal)          | Very Small   | UEF  2.50                                   | On or after May 6, 2029 |
|                                                             |                                                 | Low          |                                              |                       |
|                                                             |                                                 | Medium       |                                              |                       |
|                                                             |                                                 | High         |                                              |                       |

## Important dates

These modifications to the Regulations would come into force **six months** after the date of publication in the *Canada Gazette*, Part II.

NRCan is considering applying the new energy efficiency standards to household heat pump water heaters, based on the periods of manufacture indicated in Table 2, above.

Additionally, NRCan is considering applying reporting and verification requirements to household and commercial heat pump water heaters manufactured on or after **January 1, 2026**.

### Regulatory pathway

NRCan is considering amending the Regulations through Governor in Council amendment.

The considered changes would be pre-published in the *Canada Gazette*, Part I, followed by a public comment period. The exact date for final publication in the *Canada Gazette*, Part II will depend on the number and nature of comments received during the public comment period. Final publications are typically within a year of their initial public comment period. These changes and the timing of publication are subject to decision-making authorities under the *Energy Efficiency Act*.

## Labelling requirements

NRCan is **not considering labelling requirements** for heat pump water heaters.

## Verification requirements

NRCan would require that heat pump water heaters carry a **third-party verification mark** indicating that the product meets the energy efficiency standards, if applicable, and that information to be reported has been verified.

The verification mark is the mark of a Standards Council of Canada accredited certification body that operates an energy efficiency certification program for the product.

## Reporting requirements

### Energy efficiency report

The energy efficiency report for heat pump water heaters would include the following information:

-   **Name of product** (i.e. heat pump water heater)
-   **Brand name**
-   **Model number**
-   **Name of the manufacturer**
-   **Name of the certification body** whose verification mark would be affixed to the product
-   Whether a **mathematical model** was used to generate any of the product specific information
-   **Duty of product** (i.e. household or commercial)
-   **Rated storage volume** in litres
-   **Nominal voltage**

The energy efficiency report for **household heat pump water heaters** would also include:

-   **Type of product** (i.e. unitary or split-type)
-   **Effective storage volume** in litres
-   **First-hour rating**
-   **Uniform Energy Factor**
-   **Recovery efficiency**
-   **Nominal power input** of upper and lower resistance elements, W (Report 0 watts if none)

The energy efficiency report for **commercial heat pump water heaters** would also include:

-   **Coefficient of performance** (COP<sub>h</sub>)

The Regulations apply to products imported or shipped inter-provincially for sale or lease in Canada. An energy efficiency report must be submitted, by the dealer, to NRCan **before** the product is imported into Canada or traded inter-provincially for the first time.

### Import report

A dealer who imports these products into Canada would include the following information on the customs release document:

-   **Name of product**
-   **Model number**
-   **Brand name**
-   **Address of the dealer** importing the product
-   **Purpose for which the product is being imported** (i.e., for sale or lease in Canada without modification; for sale or lease in Canada after modification to comply with energy efficiency standards; or for use as a component in a product being exported from Canada)

## Comments invited

The purpose of this bulletin is to provide stakeholders with the technical detail required to comment on the requirements under consideration for heat pump water heaters.

It is important to NRCan that we engage the public and stakeholders on amendments to the Regulations. If you are aware of any manufacturer, importer, retailer, utility provider, small business, consumer group, organization, or representative of a specific group(s) of the population (including, but not limited to, women, 2SLGBTQQIA+ people, persons with disabilities, visible minorities, socio-economic status, residency, housing status, etc.), Indigenous peoples/communities, and/or other person or group that may be interested in participating in the amendment discussion and/or may be negatively impacted by this proposal, please forward them or their representative this bulletin. Please click here to register to our [mailing list](https://nrcanequipmentdivision.powerappsportals.com/en-US/SubscribeMarketing/) which is used to notify stakeholders of upcoming amendments, technical bulletins, webinar registrations, official publication in the Canada Gazette, etc.

[Additional information on Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations*](http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/regulations-codes-standards/6861) including a current list of Standards Council of Canada accredited certification bodies can be found on the Departments website.

We welcome your comments by **September 13, 2024**. All correspondence should be forwarded to:

Natural Resources Canada
Office of Energy Efficiency
580 Booth Street
Ottawa, ON, K1A 0E4

**E-mail**: [EEregulations-reglementEE@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:EEregulations-reglementEE@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca?subject=Bulletin  Heat Pump Water Heaters  Chauffe-eau  thermopompe  May 2024 mai)

Email subject heading to be: Bulletin  Heat Pump Water Heaters  Chauffe-eau  thermopompe  May 2024 mai