# Dishwashers - ENERGY STAR Certified

An **ENERGY STAR certified dishwasher** uses **12% less energy** and **30% less water** on average, than a standard model. Certified dishwashers feature the latest innovative technology to maximize energy, water, and monetary savings, reducing your carbon footprint and protecting natural resources.

## Benefits of ENERGY STAR Certified Dishwashers

*   Special soil sensors test how dirty the dishes are and adjust the cycle for optimum cleaning with minimum water and energy use.
*   Improved water filtration removes food soils, allowing efficient use of detergent and water. The final clean-water rinse ensures sparkling dishes.
*   More efficient jets use less energy to spray detergent and water over dishes.
*   Innovative dish rack designs maximize cleaning by strategically situating the dishes.

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict [efficiency specifications](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/technical-specifications?_ga=2.243074438.50817759.1643033387-820573303.1638557535) and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance.

*Start your research using the [ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-residential-dishwashers/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) to find and compare certified dishwashers.*

## Why should you choose ENERGY STAR?

*   **Reduce your at-home energy consumption**
*   **Save money**
*   **Keep your home comfortable**
*   **Reduce your carbon footprint**

## Tips for Choosing an Energy Efficient Dishwasher

*   Choose a model with the air dry feature and use it.
*   When choosing models, take a close look at the [EnerGuide](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/appliances-energuide) label to learn how much energy theyll use each year and over the lifetime of the product. *The lower the number, the better!*
*   Dishwashers that have earned the [ENERGY STAR Most Efficient](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/energy-star-most-efficient) designation are the best of the best  theyll save you more energy than standard models.

## How to Use Your Dishwasher Efficiently

*   **Scrape and go**: Rinsing excess food (especially with hot water) wastes water, energy, and time. Scrape your dishes, load them, and let the dishwasher do its job!
*   **Run full loads when possible**: Put all dishwasher-safe items in the dishwasher, including bulkier items like pots and pans. Lighter loads can still be more efficient than handwashing, especially with an ENERGY STAR certified dishwasher, which uses less than 15 litres of water per cycle compared to a running faucet using up to 15 litres every 2 minutes.
*   **Use the built-in setting that matches your load**: Many dishwashers use sensors to evaluate the dirtiness of the rinse water and adjust the wash duration to save energy and possibly water.

## Regulations Set the Energy Efficiency Minimum

Dishwashers are subject to Canada's *Energy Efficiency Regulations*, which set a minimum performance standard for their energy efficiency. Find details in the [Guide to the Regulations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/guide-canada-s-energy-efficiency-regulations).

## Related Blog Posts

*   [Use your dishwasher more efficiently for big savings](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/use-your-dishwasher-more-efficiently-big-savings)
*   [Recipes for energy savings in your kitchen](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/recipes-energy-savings-your-kitchen)
*   [Spring into energy savings](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/spring-energy-savings)

---

*The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.*