# Planning and reporting

Openness, transparency, and accountability are guiding principles of the Government of Canada. Government information ultimately belongs to all Canadians. In that spirit, and to adhere to requirements of the Cabinet Directive on Regulation, the Red Tape Reduction Action Plan, and the Paperwork Burden Reduction Initiative, here is planning and reporting information regarding the *Energy Efficiency Regulations*:

## Forward Regulatory Plan

The **Forward Regulatory Plan 2025-2027** is publicly available. It describes planned or anticipated regulatory changes that Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) intends to propose or finalize during that period. These plans help Canadians, including businesses, Indigenous peoples, and trading partners, to provide feedback during regulatory development and prepare for future regulatory changes. The plan will be updated to reflect new developments, regulatory priorities, or changes in NRCan's operating environment.

_Further details can be found [here](/corporate/transparency/acts-regulations/forward-regulatory-plan)._

## Administrative Burden Baseline

The Administrative Burden Baseline initiative requires departments to establish a baseline count of federal requirements in regulations that impose administrative burden on businesses. The baseline count for the *Energy Efficiency Regulations* has been **updated for 2022**.

_Further details can be found on the departmental [Administrative Burden Baseline web page](/corporate/transparency/acts-regulations/administrative-burden-baseline-update-2024)._

## Regulatory Stock Review Plan

NRCan periodically selects regulations for review, offering Canadians an opportunity to participate in the process. NRCans **Regulatory Stock Review Plan** is available and will be adjusted and updated to reflect regulatory priorities and changes in the operating environment. Currently, the *Energy Efficiency Regulations* are **not identified for review** because there was a complete repeal and replacement in 2016, the regulations have been amended 5 times since, and other amendments are anticipated.

_Further details can be found on the departmental [Regulatory Stock Review Plan web page](/node/22381)._