# Canada Greener Homes Initiative

We want to help Canadians make where they live more energy efficient. The Canada Greener Homes Initiative helps homeowners save money, creates jobs, and fights climate change.

## Latest News

- [Canada Greener Homes Initiative: Highlights and program updates](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/canada-greener-homes-initiative-highlights-program-updates)

### Explore the programs we have in place to support Canadians

## Canada Greener Homes Affordability Program

*This program, delivered through our partners in provinces and territories, will help low-to-median-income homeowners and tenants retrofit their homes to reduce monthly energy bills.*

*The full cost of recommended retrofits will be covered for eligible households. That means that participants will not be asked to pay out of pocket to participate.*

**[Learn more about the Canada Greener Homes Affordability Program](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/canada-greener-homes-affordability-program)**

## Oil to Heat Pump Affordability Program

**Status**: **OPEN FOR APPLICATIONS**

*The program helps eligible homeowners with median income or less who are currently heating their homes with oil make the transition to an eligible heat pump system. There may be no need for a home energy evaluation as part of this program.*

### Available Grants and Incentives:

- **Up to $10,000**: Grant toward the costs of changing your oil heating system to an eligible heat pump. *Available to eligible Canadian homeowners in provinces and territories where the program is delivered exclusively by the federal government.*
- **Up to $25,000**: Grants or direct installation of a heat pump for eligible homeowners in participating provinces and territories where the program is being co-delivered. *Funding amounts and program requirements vary.*
- **$250 additional**: One-time incentive payment for eligible homeowners in provinces and territories where the program is being co-delivered.

**[Learn about the program](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/oil-heat-pump-affordability-program)**

## Canada Greener Homes Grant

**Status**: **CLOSED**

*December 31, 2025, was the last day to submit your documents. Requests submitted by the deadline will continue to be processed.*

**[More about the Canada Greener Homes Grant](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/closed-canada-greener-homes-grant)**

## Canada Greener Homes Loan

**Status**: **CLOSED TO APPLICATIONS**

*October 1, 2025, was the last day to apply for a loan. Current applications submitted by the deadline will continue to be reviewed and processed.*

**[More about the Canada Greener Homes Loan](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/canada-greener-homes-loan)**

### An initiative for community and affordable housing providers

## Canada Greener Affordable Housing

**Status**: **CLOSED TO APPLICATIONS**

*January 20, 2026, was the last day to apply for this program. Current applications submitted by the deadline will continue to be reviewed and processed.*

**[Learn about the program](https://www.cmhc-schl.gc.ca/en/professionals/project-funding-and-mortgage-financing/funding-programs/all-funding-programs/canada-greener-affordable-housing-program)**

## Energy Advisors and Service Organizations

*Energy advisors and service organizations are integral parts of how we deliver the Canada Greener Homes Initiative.*

**[Log in to the Energy advisor and service organization portal](https://greenerhomes-maisonecologiques.canada.ca/partner-partenaire/s/?la=eng&la=eng&_gl=1*199tjda*_ga*MTQxNzg1MDE0MC4xNjUxMTYzMTMx*_ga_C2N57Y7DX5*MTY3MTIxNTQ0OC43Mi4xLjE2NzEyMTYwMTIuMC4wLjA.)**

## HVAC Professionals

**[Heat pump resources and tools for HVAC professionals](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/heat-pump-resources-tools-hvac-professionals)**

## For existing Grant applicants

**[Login to the Canada Greener Homes portal](https://greenerhomes-maisonecologiques.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/idp/profile/nrcan/idpdisco?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fgreenerhomes-maisonecologiques.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca&return=https%3A%2F%2Fgreenerhomes-maisonecologiques.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca%2Fidp%2Fprofile%2FSAML2%2FRedirect%2FSSO%3Fexecution%3De1s1%26_eventId_proceed%3D1)**

