# Home Winterproofing Program (HWP)

## Free energy upgrades for homes in need

Enbridge Gas and Save on Energy have teamed up to help you lower your energy use and make your home more comfortable. Now streamlined into one simple application, the Home Winterproofing Program and the [Energy Affordability Program](https://saveonenergy.ca/For-Your-Home/Energy-Affordability-Program) offer energy-saving upgrades at no cost. If your home and household income levels qualify, youll be eligible for insulation, draft proofing, ENERGY STAR certified appliances and more.

### Whats included

- **A free home energy assessment** by an authorized delivery agent
- **Free energy-efficient upgrades**, including insulation, and draft proofing
- **Access to even more free upgrades** from the Energy Affordability Program, including appliances, LED lighting and more
- **Quick, professional installation** by our qualified contractors

## Customer Testimonials

### A dream come true

For Flamborough resident Vivienne, energy savings are top of mind. As the renter of a hundred year old home, she was surprised to qualify for the Home Winterproofing Program. After an easy application, she received free home upgrades like insulation and draft proofing, which lower her energy use and boost her comfort. From installation to cleanup, the process was smooth for both her and her landlord.

### I ended up getting everything.

Joe needed extra blankets and thick wool socks to get to sleep at night in his poorly insulated older home. When he got a flyer for the Home Winterproofing Program in his Enbridge Gas bill, he decided to give it a chance. Pretty soon, he was setting up appointments to receive the free upgradesinsulation, draft proofing and a smart thermostat. His home now stays warm all winter long and his furnace doesnt work overtime.

## Application Overview

More than 65,000 homes have participated! Lets see if youre eligible for FREE upgrades. The application should take about five minutes to complete. If you would like to apply via phone, [contact a delivery agent near you](https://www.enbridgegas.com/residential/rebates-energy-conservation/home-winterproofing-program/find-energy-advisor).

**Before you begin:**

- Youll need a copy of your Enbridge Gas bill.
- The account must be in your name to apply.
- If you rent your home, well need your landlords contact information.

## Free home upgrades from two trusted programs

### Home Winterproofing Program

- **Wall, attic or basement insulation***: Proper insulation can eliminate drafts, control moisture and minimize outside noise.
- **Draft proofing***: Well seal air leaks, so the air youre paying to heat or cool your home doesnt escape through the cracks.

*Participants receiving one of the above insulation or draft proofing measures under the Home Winterproofing Program will be eligible for a Smart Thermostat installation.*

Participants who qualify for the Home Winterproofing Program may also qualify for additional upgrades offered through Energy Affordability Program.

[Learn more about the program](https://www.saveonenergy.ca/For-Your-Home/Energy-Affordability-Program)

## Is your household eligible for the Home Winterproofing Program?

- You have an Enbridge Gas account in your name.
- Your home is heated with a natural gas furnace or boiler. *If your home is electrically heated, you must apply directly to the [Energy Affordability Program](https://saveonenergy.ca/For-Your-Home/Energy-Affordability-Program).*
- You meet ONE of the following criteria:

### Your household income fits within these levels:

| Number of people in the home | Before-tax household income |
| :--------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| **1**                        | **$48,220**                 |
| **2**                        | **$68,193**                 |
| **3**                        | **$83,518**                 |
| **4**                        | **$96,439**                 |
| **5**                        | **$107,823**                |
| **6**                        | **$118,113**                |
| **7+**                       | **$127,576**                |

*Reference line 26,000 on your most recent income tax return to check for before-tax household income.*

### Or, you receive assistance from one of these government programs:

- Ontario Works
- Ontario Disability Support Program
- Low Income Energy Assistance Program (LEAP)
- Guaranteed Income Supplement
- Allowance for Seniors
- Allowance for Survivors
- Healthy Smiles
- Ontario Electricity Support Program
- Energy Affordability Program (EAP), formerly known as the Home Assistance Program (HAP)

*Homes built before 1980 have higher insulation and draft-proofing requirements. Your home can still be eligible for the Energy Affordability Program even if it does not meet the requirements for insulation and draft proofing.*

You can also be eligible if you are a resident of an eligible social or assisted housing property. Please refer to the FAQs for more details.

## How the program works

1.  **See if your home qualifies**
    *   [Apply online](#apply-now) or by phone at **1-844-770-3148**. Our streamlined application will automatically screen you for both programs. If your home is electrically heated, you must apply directly to the Energy Affordability Program.
    *   We work with [authorized delivery agents](https://www.enbridgegas.com/ontario/rebates-energy-conservation/home-winterproofing-program/find-energy-advisor) across Ontario. They'll ask for proof of income, such as a benefit statement or other supporting documents pertaining to your last [tax assessment](https://www.enbridgegas.com/-/media/Extranet-Pages/ontario/residential/rebates-energy-conservation/Home-Winterproofing-Program/NOA-NOTICE-OF-ASSESSMENT-SAMPLE.pdf?rev=d12eb7b5c0ad42619b7b6a08ee16a152&hash=81CA9E3603A5D3000F03A47A1406537D). This will be kept confidential.
2.  **Schedule a quick home visit**
    *   An [authorized delivery agent](https://www.enbridgegas.com/ontario/rebates-energy-conservation/home-winterproofing-program/find-energy-advisor) will visit your home to complete a home energy assessment. It takes about two hours, and determines which energy efficiency upgrades you qualify for, from both programs.
3.  **Free, professional installation**
    *   If we find that your home is eligible for free upgrades, our qualified contractors will install them at your convenience. Its quick and clean, and theres no cost to you.
4.  **Follow-up home visit**
    *   The same delivery agent will visit you again to make sure everythings working properly and to answer any follow-up questions.

## Frequently asked questions

### Why is this program free?

We offer a range of conservation programs that help Ontarians save energy and money. By helping income-qualified households reduce energy use, were not only doing our part in the fight against climate change, but helping to keep natural gas affordable for all with less wear-and-tear on our infrastructure.

### What makes my home eligible for upgrades?

Only homes that need energy-saving upgrades will receive them. Older homes tend to have insufficient insulation and more potential to save energy. If your home energy assessment uncovers that your home is well-insulated, it wont be eligible for free upgrades.

### Is the Home Winterproofing Program available for social housing residents?

Yes! If you are a resident or housing provider of a designated social or assisted housing property, this program is for you! We encourage you to take advantage of the Home Winterproofing Program available to help keep your home energy-efficient throughout the year.

Designated housing property types for this program include:

- Non-profit providers of social or assisted housing under a federal, provincial, or municipally funded program, including non-profit corporations governed by the Housing Services Act 2011 (as amended or any successor legislation).
- Public housing corporations owned by municipalities directly or through local housing corporations.
- Non-profit housing co-operatives as defined in the Co-operative Corporations Act.
- Non-profit housing corporations that manage or own residential (including multi-residential) buildings developed under the Affordable Housing Program.
- Non-profit organizations or municipal or provincial governments that manage or own residential (including multi-residential) supportive housing, shelters, and hostels.

For more information or to apply, please contact our authorized delivery agents by phone at **1-844-770-3148**.

### If I rent my home, can I still qualify for upgrades?

Yes, if you qualify, you will also need written permission from your landlord before we can install the upgrades.

### What documents do I need to provide as proof of income?

Well need the most recent Notice of Assessment for all household members over the age of 18 (please black out your social insurance number before sending). If you participate in a government assistance program, you can send your Benefit Statement instead.

### Are your delivery agents and contractors authorized?

We work with delivery agents across Ontario to offer this program. They are authorized to work with you every step of the way and are available to answer any questions throughout the process.

Agents authorized to deliver this program:

- **Postal codes starting with K**  EnviroCentre
- **Postal codes starting with L, M and P**  CLEAResult
- **Postal codes starting with N**  The Home Inspectors Group

### How many visits can I expect?

Well need to schedule at least three visits: the first, to assess whether your home needs energy-saving upgrades; the second, to install the upgrades; and a final follow-up visit.

### If my home is heated with a gas fireplace, can I still qualify?

Yes, you may qualify if your natural gas fireplace is the primary heat source for your home.

### I dont meet the income criteriacan I still apply?

Unfortunately, we limit participants to those who fit within the stated income criteria. Please check back as the income criteria changes from year to year. You may also qualify for other [rebates and programs](https://www.enbridgegas.com/ontario/rebates-energy-conservation).

### What type of home do I live in?

Please check for the classification of residential structures:

- **Detached**  A dwelling unit with walls and roofs independent of any other building.
- **Semi-detached**  A set of two dwelling units separated from each other by one vertical division termed party wall. Each dwelling unit is identified as double/semi-detached and evaluated separately.
- **Row house/townhouse**  A dwelling unit separated by one or at least two vertical divisions termed party walls, from the adjacent dwelling units.
- **Duplex/triplex** - A building containing two or three units fully or partially stacked, or joined by a common space if not stacked, separated from each other by vertical (i.e. party wall) or horizontal (i.e. floor or ceiling) divisions.
- **Apartment/condominium**  A building containing four or more units fully or partially stacked, or joined by a common space if not stacked. Unfortunately, this type of home cannot qualify for the program.
- **Mobile home with a permanent foundation**  a moveable dwelling unit designed and constructed to be transported by road on its own chassis to a site and placed on a permanent foundation such as blocks, posts or a pad.
- **Mobile home without a permanent foundation**  a single dwelling, designed and constructed to be transported on its own chassis and capable of being moved. Unfortunately, this type of home cannot qualify for the program.

### If I qualify, will I receive every eligible upgrade under both the Energy Affordability Program and the Home Winterproofing Program?

Our authorized delivery agents will assess which energy-saving upgrades your home requires. If your home does not require certain upgrades, such as insulation, you can still qualify for other upgrades under either program.

*Smart Thermostat installation will be offered to participants receiving one of the custom insulation or draft proofing measures under the Home Winterproofing Program.*

### Does Enbridge Gas have any ongoing campaigns or initiatives?

Yes. Our trusted social agency outreach agent, [7th Wave](https://www.7th-wave.ca/), will reach out to social agencies to provide training to agency staff so you can help your clients apply to the Home Winterproofing Program. Agencies may qualify to participate in a referral initiative program. This agency will not collect personal or confidential information over the phone.

## More tips and offers for your home

### Smart Thermostat Program

Save $75 on a smart thermostat. Before you buy, get a discount code for eligible Google Nest, ecobee, Emerson Sensi and Honeywell models. Redeem online or in store.

[Get discount code](https://www.homerenovationsavings.ca/without-assessment/smart-thermostat)

---

*See [program terms and conditions](https://www.enbridgegas.com/ontario/rebates-energy-conservation/home-winterproofing-program/terms-conditions).
 Trademark of the Independent Electricity System Operator. Used under licence.*

**Disclaimers:**
Any reference to energy savings is based on the assumption that the participant is reducing their natural gas consumption through participating in the Home Winterproofing program.