# Oil-fired water heaters - household

## Energy Efficiency Regulations

### Regulatory Definition
**Household oil-fired water heater**: A water heater that uses oil for fuel, has an input rate of less than or equal to **30.5 kW (105,000 Btu/h)**, and that has a V<sub>r</sub> of at least **76 L (20 US gallons)**.

### Compliance Date
Manufactured on or after **January 1, 2018**.
*For models manufactured prior, refer to the Regulations.*

### Compliant Product Models
**Oil-fired water heaters - household** as listed on NRCans searchable database: [https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=WH.Oil-fired.House](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=WH.Oil-fired.House)

### Testing Standard
- **CSA B211-00** for energy factor
- **CSA P.3-15** for uniform energy factor

> *Some provinces also have their own energy efficiency regulations for many of the federally regulated products  [find out which ones!](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/energy-products-regulated-federally-provincially)*

### Energy Efficiency Standard

| If the first hour rating is:                         | Energy factor     | Uniform energy factor      |
| :--------------------------------------------------- | :---------------- | :------------------------- |
|  68 L (18 US gallons) Tested to the very small draw pattern |  0.68  0.0005 V<sub>r</sub> |  0.2509  0.00032 V<sub>s</sub> |
|  68 L (18 US gallons) but  193 L (51 gallons) Tested to the low draw pattern |  0.68  0.0005 V<sub>r</sub> |  0.5330  0.00042 V<sub>s</sub> |
|  193 L (51 gallons) but  284 L (75 US gallons) Tested to the medium draw pattern |  0.68  0.0005 V<sub>r</sub> |  0.6078  0.00042 V<sub>s</sub> |
|  284 L (75 US gallons) Tested to the high draw pattern |  0.68  0.0005 V<sub>r</sub> |  0.6815  0.00037 V<sub>s</sub> |

**Key to terms:**
- **L**: Litres
- **V<sub>r</sub>**: The rated nominal volume, typically used in marketing material
- **V<sub>s</sub>**: The measured storage volume as defined in the testing standard

**Notes:**
- A model tested using the **Energy Factor (CSA B211-00)** must only submit their **Energy Factor (EF)** value.
- A model tested using the **Uniform Energy Factor (CSA P.3-15)** must only submit their **Uniform Energy Factor (UEF)** value.
- The Minimum Energy Performance Standard (MEPS) formulae are equivalent in terms of energy performance, even though they may result in a different number. This is due to the parameters of the different testing standards.
- A specific conversion equation must be used to make an acceptable comparison between Energy Factor values and Uniform Energy Factor values.
- Models tested using one specific UEF draw pattern cannot be compared to another model of a different UEF draw pattern.

### Energy Efficiency Report Requirements
- **Name of product**
- **Brand name**
- **Model number**
- **Manufacturer**
- **Name of the certification body or province** whose verification mark will be on the product or its package
- Whether a mathematical model as defined in the Regulations was used to generate any of the information provided below
- **V<sub>r</sub>**, expressed in litres
- **V<sub>s</sub>**, expressed in litres
- **Input rate**, expressed in kilowatts (Btu/h)
- **Recovery efficiency**
- **Energy factor**
- **Uniform energy factor**
- **Annual energy consumption**, expressed in kilojoules
- **First hour rating**, expressed in litres

*Sign in to the [Compliance Regulatory Energy Efficiency Database (CREED)](https://energy-reporting-rapports-energetiques.canada.ca/creed/s/) to download and submit an energy efficiency report for this product.*

*This document does not constitute part of the Energy Efficiency Act (Act) or its associated regulations. This document is an administrative document that is intended to facilitate compliance by the regulated party with the Act and its associated regulations. This document is not intended to provide legal advice regarding the interpretation of the Act or its associated regulations. If a regulated party has questions about their legal obligations or responsibilities under the Act or its associated regulations, they should seek the advice of legal counsel.*

**Date modified**: 2025-11-06