# EnerGuide-rated New Homes

## Why choose an EnerGuide-rated new home?

-   **Investments in energy efficiency** at the construction stage will pay off in lower energy bills.
-   An **EnerGuide rating, label and report** will help you better understand your homes energy performance, which may help you lower your energy use.
-   An EnerGuide label is an **official record of your homes energy performance**, and may help increase its resale value.
-   EnerGuide is backed by the Government of Canada, and all participating builders must be registered with Natural Resources Canada.
-   Become part of the solution for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and addressing climate change.

_Choose a builder who uses the EnerGuide Rating System to improve the energy performance of their homes._

_Talk to your builder about the energy performance of your home and ask for an EnerGuide rating._

## How EnerGuide's gigajoules rating scale works

**EnerGuide Rating: Gigajoules per Year Scale**

*Text version of EnerGuide Home Label details:*

Learn more about your homes energy through the rating (you will receive a rating of the homess energy consumption in gigajoules); Aim towards zero (the lower the number on the new EnerGuide scale, the better the energy performance of your home); Understand how you use energy (the label breaks down energy consumed by source); compare your homes performance (the label shows how your homes performance compares to a benchmark home); find out where the most energy consumed (the label shows proportion of energy consumed by heating, cooling, ventilation, etc); and see your impact on the environment (the label shows your homes Greenhouse Gas Emissions).

Learn how Natural Resources Canadas EnerGuide makes homes more energy-efficient, more valuable, and more comfortable at [nrcan.gc.ca/homes](http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/homes)

### The EnerGuide gigajoules rating shows the energy performance of a home:

-   The **lower the number**, the better the energy performance of the home.
-   **Zero (0)** is the **best energy performance** a home can get. It indicates a home that produces as much energy as it consumes.