# What does the EnerGuide label mean?

## EnerGuide labels help you compare

The familiar black-and-white EnerGuide label shows how much energy a product uses and how it compares to similar models. It helps you make informed decisions about the energy-using products you buy  from big-ticket items like dishwashers to simple light bulbs.

The EnerGuide label on some regulated products  such as major appliances, heating and cooling equipment, and windows, doors and skylights  may include an ENERGY STAR logo. This symbol is reserved for the most energy-efficient models in each product class.

Learn more about the [ENERGY STAR initiative in Canada](/energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada).

## EnerGuide for homes

An EnerGuide label indicates a rating that will help you better understand your homes energy performance, which may help you lower your energy use. An EnerGuide label is an official record of your homes energy performance, and may help increase its resale value. Become part of the solution for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and addressing climate change. [Learn how to read the label.](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/after-your-energuide-home-evaluation)

## EnerGuide for appliances

Choose energy-efficient major appliances to add value to your home, keep your family comfortable and healthy, and save money on energy. The EnerGuide label helps consumers compare models and make smart choices.

## Canadian versus American labels

Some major appliances may have both a Canadian EnerGuide (black and white) label and an American EnergyGuide label (black and yellow). Canada and the United States use similar methods to rate energy efficiency. However, the scales may differ due to the number and types of models available in each country.

*Image: Canada's EnerGuide label*

**The Canadian EnerGuide label shows**

-   annual energy consumption in **kilowatt hours (kWh)**
-   an arrow indicating the models performance compared with the most and least efficient models in the same class
-   the type and capacity of models in the same class
-   the model number
-   an ENERGY STAR logo, if applicable

*Image: United States EnergyGuide label*

**The American EnergyGuide label shows**

-   key features
-   make, model and size
-   estimated cost of operation based on average electricity use
-   annual energy consumption in **kilowatt hours (kWh)**
-   an ENERGY STAR logo, if applicable

## Mandatory vs. voluntary labels

The EnerGuide label is **mandatory** for

-   [clothes dryers](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/list-certified-products/clothes-dryers)
-   [clothes washers (including integrated washer-dryers)](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/list-certified-products/clothes-washers)
-   [dishwashers](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/list-certified-products/dishwashers)
-   [freezers](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/list-certified-products/freezers)
-   [electric ranges, cooktops and ovens](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/cooking-appliances)
-   [refrigerators, refrigerator-freezers and wine chillers](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/list-certified-products/refrigerators)
-   [room air conditioners](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/room-air-conditioners-energuide)

The EnerGuide label is **voluntary** for:

-   [central air conditioners](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/central-air-conditioners-energuide)
-   [furnaces](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/furnaces-energuide) (oil, gas or propane-fired)
-   [heat pumpsair source](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/air-source-ductless-heat-pumps-energuide)
-   [gas fireplaces](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/gas-fireplaces-energuide)
-   [water heaters](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/storage-tank-water-heaters-energuide)

## Label types and languages

Mandatory EnerGuide labels are printed on stickers or hanging tags. These labels must provide information in both English and French.

Voluntary EnerGuide labels are usually printed as graphics in the product literature. These labels may be unilingual.

*Date modified: 2025-01-16*