# Storage tank water heatersEnerGuide

## The voluntary EnerGuide label

The EnerGuide label allows consumers to check the energy efficiency of storage tank water heaters they intend to buy or rent.

The label provides a sliding scale from lowest to highest indicating which models are the most energy-efficient. Water heater manufacturers will place an EnerGuide label in their product literature.

*   **Electric storage tank water heaters**: The energy efficiency is measured by **standby loss** that is indicated in **Watts**. The lower the number, the more efficient the model is.
*   **Gas/propane storage tank water heaters**: The energy efficiency is measured by **uniform energy factor (UEF)**. The higher the number, the more efficient the model is.

For gas storage tank water heaters, the EnerGuide label may be beside the ENERGY STAR symbol for certified models.

### EnerGuide label for an electric storage tank water heater

*Image: EnerGuide label for an electric storage tank water heater*

There are three main items displayed on the label:

1.  The **standby loss** of the water heater model, indicated in **Watts**.
2.  The **range available** for similar models (same type and similar capacity).
3.  The **indicator**, which positions the model compared with the most efficient and least efficient models in the same class.

### EnerGuide label for a gas or propane storage tank water heater

*Image: New EnerGuide label for gas and propane storage water heaters. The label depicts the new uniform energy factor (UEF) rating on a bar scale. On the left is the models capacity. This label represents a Very Small capacity with a UEF of 0.60.*

There are three main items displayed on the label:

1.  The **uniform energy factor (UEF)** of the water heater model.
2.  The models **capacity** is based on the first hour rating of the model.
3.  The **indicator**, which positions the model compared with the more energy use and less energy use, the more to the right, the more efficient.

### What consumers should know about the new EnerGuide label for gas storage water heaters.

*Image: A graphic comparing the difference between the old EnerGuide label and the new EnerGuide label for gas and propane storage water heaters. The old label depicts the energy factor rating on a bar scale. The new label depicts the new uniform energy factor (UEF) rating on a bar scale.*

The new UEF standard divides all water heater products into 4 different capacities. Water heaters can now be compared by their application. Below are some examples of the capacitys applications.

*Image: Graphic depicting a table demonstrating the four different capacities found in the uniform energy factor test method. Each capacity is illustrated with an example of an application.*

For example:

*   **Very Small capacity** is for hand sinks.
*   **Low capacity** is for a small cottage.
*   **Medium capacity** is for a small house.
*   **High capacity** is for a house.

ENERGY STAR certified products are typically medium and high capacity. Each capacity has a minimum UEF level.

*Image: Graphic illustrating the two capacities (Medium and High) and the Uniform Energy Factor rating used for ENERGY STAR qualified products.*

*   For **ENERGY STAR medium capacity**, the **UEF is greater than or equal to 0.64**.
*   For **ENERGY STAR high capacity**, the **UEF is greater than or equal to 0.68**.

EnerGuide labels help you compare the efficiency of like products. Below are some tips on how to compare products using the new label.

*Image: Graphic illustrating two EnerGuide labels which can be compared to each other.*

These two labels are for different models that are the same capacity and have different UEF rating numbers. The label on the left is a Low capacity unit with a UEF rating of 0.60 and the label on the right is also a Low capacity unit with a UEF rating of 0.70. Therefore, the water heater with the label on the right would be more energy efficient.

The values of the old label cannot be compared with the values of the new label.

*Image: Graphic illustrating two EnerGuide labels that cannot be used to compare water heaters because they use different rating factors.*

The label on the left is a Energy Factor label of 0.60 and the label on the right is a Uniform Energy Factor label of medium capacity with a UEF rating of 0.60.

The two rating metrics EF and UEF are not directly comparable to each other. Therefore, the two water heaters with these two labels cannot be compared to see which one is more energy efficient.

Only compare models of similar capacities.

*Image: Graphic illustrating two EnerGuide labels for different models that are the same capacity and have different UEF rating numbers. These two labels and units can be compared.*

The label on the left is a High capacity with a UEF rating of 0.60 and the label on the right is a High capacity with a UEF rating of 0.70.

Therefore, the water heater with the label on the right would be more energy efficient.

Models of different capacities cannot be compared.

*Image: Graphic illustrating two EnerGuide labels that cannot be used to compare water heaters because the water heaters are different capacities.*

The label on the left is a Uniform Energy Factor label low capacity and a UEF rating of 0.60. The label on the right is a Uniform Energy Factor label of medium capacity with a UEF rating of 0.60.

***

The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.