# Gas ranges

## Energy Efficiency Regulations

### Regulatory Definition
**Gas range**: A household propane or natural gas range that has an electrical power source, is used for food preparation and provides one of the following functions: surface cooking, oven cooking, or broiling.

### Compliance Date
**Manufactured on or after**: February 3, 1995
*For models manufactured prior to this date, refer to the Regulations.*

### Testing Standard
**None**

### Energy Efficiency Standard
It must not have a **continuously burning pilot light**.

### Energy Efficiency Regulations by Province
Some provinces also have their own energy efficiency regulations for many of the federally regulated products. [Find out which ones!](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/energy-products-regulated-federally-provincially)

### Energy Efficiency Report Requirements
To submit an energy efficiency report, the following information is required:
-   **Name of product**
-   **Brand name**
-   **Model number**
-   **Manufacturer**
-   **Volume of usable oven space** (in litres)
-   Whether the range is **built-in or free-standing**
-   Whether the broilers are **open or closed**
-   Whether a mathematical model (as defined in the Regulations) was used to generate any of the information provided.

[Sign in to the Compliance Regulatory Energy Efficiency Database (CREED)](https://energy-reporting-rapports-energetiques.canada.ca/creed/s/) to download and submit an energy efficiency report for this product.

### Legal Disclaimer
*This document does not constitute part of the Energy Efficiency Act (Act) or its associated regulations. This document is an administrative document that is intended to facilitate compliance by the regulated party with the Act and its associated regulations. This document is not intended to provide legal advice regarding the interpretation of the Act or its associated regulations. If a regulated party has questions about their legal obligations or responsibilities under the Act or its associated regulations, they should seek the advice of legal counsel.*

### Date Modified
**2025-02-17**
