# About Integrated Community Energy Solutions

In Canada, **energy used by the multiple sectors at work in communities, from housing to industry, accounts for some 60% of our total energy consumption**. In most communities, the sectors that make up the \"built environment\" are largely independent of one another when it comes to energy use. **Integrated Community Energy Solutions (ICES)** make use of the opportunities that come from treating the built community environment as a system.

## What are ICES?

As their name suggests, ICES take advantage of opportunities to improve energy efficiency beyond individual buildings and houses to encompass whole communities. ICES also consider not only buildings, but how energy is supplied and consumed in all sectors including:

*   **Transportation**
*   **Land-use planning**
*   **Industry**
*   **Water management**
*   **Waste management**

By taking a more holistic approach to energy supply and demand, ICES provide a more effective way to manage energy to the benefit of an entire community. This can include:

*   Using waste heat from industry to heat other buildings.
*   Community planning that encourages walking, cycling, and use of public transit.
*   Situating buildings to make the most of the energy from the sun.
*   More accessible walking and cycling routes.
*   Built-in connections to help emerging low-emission technologies such as plug-in electric vehicles and solar heating gain ground.

These solutions can be applied to new developments, existing neighbourhoods, and even whole regions.

## Benefits

Because ICES can increase energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy, they are seen as a promising new way to reduce **greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions**. Early studies suggest that ICES could reduce GHG emissions of communities by as much as **40 to 50%**.

Other significant benefits of investing in ICES include:

*   More livable cities and a better quality of life for citizens.
*   Improved air and water quality.
*   Local economic stimulation.
*   Reduced exposure to fluctuations in energy prices.
*   Communities that are more competitive and attractive to new investment.

## Find out more

*   [Integrated Community Energy Solutions  A Roadmap for Action](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/integrated-community-energy-solutions-roadmap-action)
*   [Examples](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/examples)

*Date modified: 2025-02-12*