# Energy-saving tips for condo living

Even if your home has a small footprint, you can still be using energy inefficiently.

## Try these five energy saving tips for your condo.

### 1. Think smart
A **smart thermostat** can help you control your heating and cooling by automatically learning your schedule and allowing you to remotely control your home temperature, an ideal feature when your schedule changes on the fly.

*Learn how to get the biggest savings from your smart thermostat.* 

### 2. Beware of your condo's vampires
Gaming equipment, phone chargers, the microwave, and other electronics can cost you if they're plugged in, even when you're not using them. In fact, the average microwave actually uses more energy to power its clock than to heat your food! A **programmable power bar with auto on/off** can help you save **10 per cent** on your energy costs.

### 3. Set the right mood
Lighting has a big impact on the look and feel of your place, and it can also affect your energy bill. Switching to **LED lighting** means using **75 to 90 per cent less energy** than traditional incandescent lighting. And, if you really want to take things up a notch, think about smart lighting. Using your smartphone, you can turn your lights on and off, and even change their colours for a new look.

### 4. Keep it clean
Making sure your condo or apartment is relatively dust-free can be tricky but its a great way to keep your place efficient and keep costs down.

**Air purifiers** are great for dust-ridden spaces but they can be a drain on energy. So, look for **ENERGY STAR-certified air purifiers**, which use **40 per cent less energy** than standard ones. Plus, vacuum or clean your vents, including the bathroom exhaust fan, to keep them running more efficiently.

Most condo and apartment buildings will replace ventilation filters annually but if yours doesnt, make sure you do it yourself twice a year or more frequently if you have pets or allergies. A dirty filter is inefficient and can also cause your heating and cooling system to break down.

### 5. Look for energy-saving appliances
Looking for a new washer and dryer? Or maybe a new fridge? Make sure you go for **ENERGY STAR-certified appliances**. For example, a dryer with that blue seal uses **20 per cent less energy** than standard models. They also often have built-in sensors to detect when your clothes are dry, saving you energy but also valuable time. Installing a **ceiling fan** is also a great way to cut down on air conditioning costs in the summer. An **ENERGY STAR-certified fan** uses **60 per cent less energy** than a traditional one, so keep that seal in mind when shopping.

## You may also be interested in
- **What is home automation?**
- **Buying Guide: LED light bulbs**
- **Get the biggest savings from your smart thermostat**