# Clothes Washers

An **ENERGY STAR certified clothes washer** (or washing machine) uses **25% less energy**, on average, than a standard model, and **33% less water**. Pairing it with an ENERGY STAR certified clothes dryer can lead to double savings. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

## Benefits of ENERGY STAR certified clothes washers

-   **Front-loaders** tumble clothes through a small amount of water instead of rubbing clothes against an agitator in a full tub.
-   **Advanced top-load models** flip or spin clothes through a stream of water (rather than filling up the entire washer), which requires less water and less energy to heat the water.
-   **High spin speeds**: Efficient motors spin clothes two to three times faster during the spin cycle to extract more water. Less moisture in the clothes means less energy used by the dryer.
-   **Sensors** to monitor incoming water levels and temperature.

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict [efficiency specifications](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/technical-specifications) and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

*You can use the [ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-clothes-washers/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) to find and compare certified washing machines.*

## Why should you choose ENERGY STAR?

-   **Reduce your at-home energy consumption**
-   **Save money**
-   **Keep your home comfortable**
-   **Reduce your carbon footprint**

## Tips for choosing an energy efficient clothes washer

-   Look for a higher **Integrated Modified Energy Factor (IMEF)**. This is a measure of energy efficiency that factors in the energy used while heating the water, washing, and on standby.
-   When choosing similar models, take a close look at the **EnerGuide label** to learn how much energy theyll use each year and over the lifetime of the product. *The lower the number, the better!*
-   Washing machines that have earned the **ENERGY STAR Most Efficient** designation are the best of the best  theyll save you more energy than standard models.

## How to use your clothes washer efficiently

-   **Fill, but dont overfill**: Washers operate most efficiently when theyre full but can be overloaded or damaged by heavy loads.
-   **Choose the high-speed or extended spin option** to get more water out of your clothes and reduce your drying time.
-   **Wash in cold water** to save energy used to heat water. If hot water is necessary, set the water level at the minimum and use a cold-water rinse.
-   **Pre-soak items** that are extra dirty to avoid double washing.

## Regulations set the energy efficiency minimum

Washing machines are subject to Canada's *Energy Efficiency Regulations*, which set a minimum performance standard for their energy efficiency. Details can be found in the [Guide to the Regulations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/guide-canada-s-energy-efficiency-regulations).
