# Set-top boxes

ENERGY STAR certified set-top boxes (STBs) **use up to 25% less energy**, on average, than standard models. STBs decode signals from cable, satellite, or Internet service providers. Most models offer digital video recording (DVR/PVR) and high-definition resolution display. Thin-client STBs receive content over a home network from another STB but cannot interface directly with your service provider.

## Recommendations for Set-top Boxes

*   When choosing a cable or satellite service, **ask the service provider for an ENERGY STAR certified STB**.
*   If purchasing an STB, **make sure to buy ENERGY STAR certified models**.
*   If you have existing cable or satellite service, **check with your service provider for upgrade options** to newly certified ENERGY STAR boxes.

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict efficiency specifications and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

_To find and compare certified set-top boxes, use the [ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-set-top-boxes/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) (redirects to U.S. ENERGY STAR website)._

## Why choose ENERGY STAR?

*   **Reduce your at-home energy consumption**
*   **Save money**
*   **Keep your home comfortable**
*   **Reduce your carbon footprint**

## How to use your set-top box efficiently

*   You only need one higher energy-using set-top box that interfaces with an external source. **Use thin-client STBs for additional televisions** in your home to increase your energy savings.
*   Households can experience significant energy savings through the deployment of multi-room thin-client devices. STB energy savings can be **up to 30%** versus having one DVR per television.
*   **Ask your TV service provider to turn on power-saving features** such as light-sleep or deep-sleep that put the box into lower power modes during periods of inactivity.
*   If youre going on vacation, **unplug your STB(s)** to reduce energy use.
*   **Use an advanced power strip or \"smart\" power bar**. Plug the TV into the master receptacle and plug other devices such as your STB into the slave receptacles. Turning off the TV cuts power to the other devices too, automatically saving energy and reducing your electricity costs.

## Regulations set the energy efficiency minimum

Digital television adapters are subject to Canada's **Energy Efficiency Regulations**, which set a minimum performance standard for their energy efficiency. More details can be found in the [Guide to the Regulations](/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/guide-canada-s-energy-efficiency-regulations).

## Related Blog Posts

*   [Energy-efficient entertainment at home](/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/energy-efficient-entertainment-home)
*   [Integrate energy efficiency into your living space](/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/integrate-energy-efficiency-your-living-space)

---

_The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada._

**Date modified**: 2025-01-14