# Pool pumps

## Buy ENERGY STAR to save you money!
Many consumers dont realize how much energy is wasted by a typical, single-speed pool pump. ENERGY STAR certified pool pumps include in-ground pool pumps, above-ground pool pumps and pressure cleaner booster pumps. An ENERGY STAR certified in-ground pool pump uses **up to 65% less energy**, on average, than a standard model while certified above-ground pool pumps **use about 17% less energy**. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

### Key features
- Use efficient motors, advanced hydraulic designs, and variable or two-speed technology to deliver appropriate flow for filtration and cleaning.
- Run quieter, require less maintenance and prolong the life of your pool's filtering system.
- Slower water filtration rates allow for better and more effective filtration of the pool water and put less strain on the filters, plumbing, and other parts of the system, reducing the chance of leaks, repairs, or premature plumbing component replacement.

*Start your research [using the ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool to find and compare](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-pool-pumps/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) certified pool pumps (NOTE: you will be redirected to the US ENERGY STAR website).*

### Helpful tips
- Program your pump to match the pool operation. Many tasks require less than full speed. Reducing pump speed by one-half allows the pump to use just one-eighth as much energy.
- Perform regular preventive maintenance. Backwash or clean the filter as recommended by the manufacturer to maintain maximum efficiency.
- Use a pool cover to reduce heating costs.
- Use an Internet-connected pool pump to allow full control, even at a distance.
- Use a pool timer to reduce filtration times and save even more energy. Several short cycles can keep the pool clean all day.

*See the [infographic for more tips on saving energy](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/pool-pumps-infographic).*

### The ENERGY STAR Promise
All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict efficiency specifications and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

---

The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.