# Air leaks: What you need to know

*Manage air leaks and waste less energy in your home*

## Steps you can take to a more efficient home.

Air leaks can cause energy waste, dry air, and more. Dont worry, though, we can help you find the best ways to reduce or prevent them.

### Checking the interior of your home

1.  **The paper test**
    *Looking for a quick and easy way to tell if your home is leaking air? Simply shut a door or window on a piece of paper. If you can pull it out, youve got a gap and your home is leaking air.*
2.  **Test for more air leaks with a blower door test**
    *Using a large blower door fan at the exterior door to depressurize the air inside, a qualified energy professional can locate the places where air is flowing into or out of your home through cracks.*

### Recommendations for Air Leak Management

3.  **Weatherproofing and caulking**
    *Simple and straightforward, weatherstripping and caulking around your windows and doors can help keep your home sealed.*
4.  **Insulate your home**
    *Choose the right insulation for your attic and walls to increase the comfort of your home, basement and garage while preventing air leaks and reducing energy costs.*
5.  **Check the exterior of your home**
    *Manage air leaks and waste less energy in your home by checking for any cracks and holes in your homes exterior, where two different building materials meet. These areas include outdoor water faucets, all exterior corners and the foundation of the bottom exterior where brick or siding meet. If you find any air leaks during your inspection, consider contacting a qualified energy professional who will help you locate specific leaks and provide additional expert advice on how to make your home more airtight.*

### Related Resources

*   [How a home energy audit can help reduce costs.](/For-Your-Home/Advice-and-Tips/Home-energy-audit-reduces-household-energy-costs)
*   [Read our insulation buying guide here.](/For-Your-Home/Advice-and-Tips/Insulation-Buying-Guide)

### You may also be interested in:

*   **Quiz: Are you an insulation expert?**
    *   [Link to Quiz](/For-Your-Home/Advice-and-Tips/Insulation-Quiz)
*   **Buying Guide: Getting started with insulation**
    *   [Link to Guide](/For-Your-Home/Advice-and-Tips/Insulation-Buying-Guide)
*   **Buying guide: windows**
    *   [Link to Guide](/For-Your-Home/Advice-and-Tips/Windows-buying-guide)