# Make the most of your energy-efficient backyard this summer

## Save energy with these tips to help make your backyard comfortable and energy efficient.

Whether you have a backyard, balcony, courtyard, or garden, make the most of the long days of summer with some simple upgrades that will help your outdoor living space become more energy efficient.

### Swap your outdoor light bulbs for LEDs

Upgrade your light bulbs to **ENERGY STAR certified LEDs**. They last up to **25 times longer** than traditional incandescent bulbs and use about **70 to 90 percent less energy**. Plus, LEDs come in all shapes, sizes and colours, so you can tailor your outdoor space to your personal style.

> **Go further:** Keep light bulb colour temperature in mind to create the right ambience on your patio. Choose warm hues to mimic the light generated from a campfire or a summer sunset. When shopping, look for **ENERGY STAR certified fixtures**, which use a quarter of the electricity that standard fixtures use.

### No Plug? Use solar-powered lights

Make your outdoor evening time brighter by using **solar-powered lights** in areas where there are no electrical plugs. Harnessing the power of the sun, this outdoor lighting option automatically charges during the day and discharges at night - lasting anywhere between **eight and 10 hours** - without adding costs to your electricity bill.

### Set timers for lighting and water features

Reduce your energy consumption with **heavy-duty outdoor timers**. Set patio lights to turn on just before sundown and turn off before sunrise to avoid wasting energy.

If you have an outdoor pond or fountain, installing a timer on your pump can help you save on your monthly electricity bill by offsetting additional electricity costs. Ensure your pump is off during daytime peak energy hours and circulate water in the evening to keep your water clean and chemically balanced.

> **Go further:** Use **smart plugs** outdoors to control and monitor plug-in lights or equipment. These easy, inexpensive plugs can be configured using an app to monitor and optimize energy consumption.

### Seek out battery-powered lawn care equipment.

By using **electric lawn care tools**, including mowers, trimmers, and leaf blowers, you can do your part to help the environment while saving money in the long run. In fact, if just half the gas-powered lawn mowers were replaced with their electric counterparts, it would reduce the same amount of emissions as [removing two million vehicles from the road](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-to-pick-a-lawnmower/). By opting for an electric yard tool, youre also eliminating the need for winter storage while producing far less noise pollution (your neighbours will thank you).

> **Go further:** When buying electric seasonal equipment, look for tools that use the **same batteries** so that you can easily swap them out.

### Use a solar blanket to prevent your pool from losing heat

If you have a pool, consider incorporating a **solar blanket** into your regular heating routine.

Did you know that [your pool can lose up to 50 percent or more of the heat that accumulates during the day due to evaporation](https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/swimming-pool-covers) when the weather is cool and windy? Imagine the steam rising off a lake in the early hours of the morning  the same thing happens to pools. Minimize water loss, raise pool temperatures, and reduce energy costs by using a solar cover or blanket.

### Maintain foliage around your AC unit

If youre using trees and shrubbery to conceal or shade your air conditioning unit, be sure these nearby plants arent interrupting its air flow. Trim any foliage back at least **two feet** to optimize air flow to keep your unit running efficiently.

### Build your energy action plan

Saving energy during the summer months is easier than you might think. For more tips on how to reduce your home energy consumption, check out the new **My Energy Action Plan** tool, and receive customized tips and resources to get started on your energy-efficiency journey.

[Build your energy action plan](/For-Your-Home/My-Energy-Action-Plan)

---

**References**

 [Scientific American: How to Pick a Lawn Mower Thats Easy on Man  And Nature](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-to-pick-a-lawnmower/)

 [Energy Saver: Swimming Pool Covers](https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/swimming-pool-covers)