# Commercial EV Charging Rates

If you own or operate a commercial electric vehicle (EV) charging station, you may be eligible for the new Electric Vehicle Charging (EVC) Rate.

The **EVC Rate** is an electricity delivery rate designed specifically for eligible EV charging stations in Ontario to better reflect the transmission costs of serving EV chargers with low load factors. It reduces the Retail Transmission Service Rates (RTSRs) paid by participating EV charging stations.

## Who is eligible for the EVC Rate?
EV charging stations must meet all the following criteria to participate in the EVC Rate:

*   Have at least one **Direct Current Fast Charger**
*   Ensure that at least **90% of total monthly peak demand** is attributable to EV charging
*   Have a monthly peak demand between **50 kW and 4,999 kW**
*   Have a **12-month average load factor of 20% or less**
*   Must not primarily serve commercial/public sector EV fleets, and
*   Any distributed energy resource behind the accounts meter must not exceed the stations annual peak demand.

## Who is considered a customer under the EVC Rate?
A \"customer\" refers to the owner or operator of an EV charging station whose facilities are connected to or are intended to be connected to an electricity distributors distribution system. A customer is not the end-user of the EV charging service, such as the driver of a vehicle that uses the EV charging station.

## How is the EVC Rate calculated?
The EVC Rate reduces the RTSRs that participating EV charging stations would otherwise pay. RTSRs are part of the electricity bill.

Participating customers will pay **17% of the RTSR** that other customers in a distributors General Service 50 kW to 4,999 kW class will pay. In other words, if a customers base RTSR is $100/kW, it would instead pay $17/kW under the EVC Rate. The EVC Rate better aligns the RTSRs paid by participating EV charging stations with the transmission system costs incurred to serve them.

## How do I apply for the EVC Rate?
You must submit an [opt-in form](https://www.oakvillehydro.com/sites/oakvillehydro/files/2025-10/FORM%20OH%20EVC%20Rate%20Opt-In_2025-09-18.pdf) to us by email at [CustomerService@oakvillehydro.com](mailto:CustomerService@oakvillehydro.com).