# Manufactured Fenestration Products

**Publication Date**: May 2024

## Technical Bulletin on Developing the Standards

**Webinar**: Wednesday, June 19, 2024, 1:00-2:00 pm EDT

Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) is updating its Forward Regulatory Plan to amend Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations* to include manufactured fenestration products as a new energy-using product, with labeling and reporting requirements. This technical bulletin initiates the consultation process to gather stakeholder views. Input will inform future amendments, and NRCan will assess economic and environmental impacts. The Government of Canada intends to pre-publish a regulatory proposal in the *Canada Gazette*, Part I, in 2025.

## Background

Manufactured fenestration products are not currently regulated as energy-using products but significantly impact a home's energy consumption and are crucial for high-performing building envelopes. More efficient products can save energy and reduce costs for Canadians. An efficient building envelope is vital for reducing energy-related greenhouse gas emissions, and these requirements would encourage improved product designs.

The Government of Canada is committed to reducing energy consumption from consumer, commercial, and industrial products to support the goal of **net-zero emissions by 2050**. The considered labeling and reporting requirements would complement existing provincial/municipal energy efficiency standards (e.g., Ontario, British Columbia, Vancouver, Yellowknife) and provide product efficiency information to the public, technical professionals, and building code authorities.

## Product Description

A **manufactured fenestration product** is defined as a manufactured or pre-assembled window, door, or skylight that separates a conditioned space from the unconditioned space or the exterior. It is intended for installation in a residential building with an area not exceeding 600 m and a height of 3 stories or less.

It includes:
- **Windows and sliding glass doors**
- **Hinged and bi-folding doors**, including glazing in doors, transom windows, and sidelites
- **Skylights** including unit skylights, roof windows, and tubular daylighting devices

### Testing Standards

NRCan is considering referencing the following testing standards using ambulatory incorporation by reference (as amended from time to time):
- **CSA-A440.2-22**  *Fenestration energy performance*
- **ANSI/NFRC-100-23**  *Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product U-factors*
- **ANSI/NFRC-200-23**  *Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product Solar Heat Gain Coefficient and Visible Transmittance at Normal Incidence*

*Note: CSA testing standards can be ordered from the CSA website. Many CSA energy efficiency standards are also available at no cost after creating an account. ANSI/NFRC testing standards can be ordered from the NFRC website.*

### Energy Efficiency Standard

NRCan is **not considering any energy efficiency standards** for manufactured fenestration products at this time.

## Important Dates

- Modifications to the Regulations would come into force **six months** after publication in the *Canada Gazette*, Part II.
- NRCan is considering making these new regulatory requirements applicable to products manufactured on or after **January 1, 2028**.

### Regulatory Pathway

NRCan is considering amending the Regulations through Governor in Council amendment. The changes would be pre-published in the *Canada Gazette*, Part I, followed by a public comment period. Final publication in the *Canada Gazette*, Part II, typically occurs within a year of the initial public comment period and depends on feedback received. These changes are subject to decision-making authorities under the *Energy Efficiency Act*.

## Labelling Requirements

NRCan is considering a mandatory labeling requirement for manufactured fenestration products. Each individual model would bear an information label in a form prescribed by NRCan. 

**Mandatory information** on the prescribed label would include:
- **Manufacturer**
- **Date of manufacture**
- **Model type and class**
- **Model Identification code or National Fenestration Rating Council Certified Product Directory (NFRC CPD) code**
- **Mark of certification body responsible for testing**
- **U-factor of the total assembly in W/mK** (if composite, U-factor of individual units can be reported)
- **Solar Heat Gain Coefficient (SHGC) of the total assembly** (if composite, SHGC of individual units can be reported)
- **Visible Transmittance (VT) of the total assembly** (if composite, VT of individual units can be reported)

The label may also include the following **optional information**:
- Tested air leakage SI units (L/sm)
- Tested air leakage in IP units (cfm/ft)
- Calculated Energy Rating (ER) value
- U-factor in IP units (Btu/hftF)
- Program participation and certification badges (ENERGY STAR, etc.)
- Information to direct reader to secondary sources (i.e., URL, QR code, etc.)

## Verification Requirements

NRCan would require manufactured fenestration products to carry a third-party verification mark indicating that the reported information has been verified. Products would carry:
- An energy efficiency verification mark authorized by a certification body accredited by the **Standard Council of Canada** according to required testing standards, **or**
- The energy efficiency verification mark of the **National Fenestration Rating Council (NFRC)** according to required testing standards.

The energy efficiency verification mark would only be placed on the exterior of the product **or on a temporary label affixed to the exterior of the product**.

Information in the energy efficiency report would need to be verified by one of the aforementioned accredited certification bodies.

## Reporting Requirements

### Energy Efficiency Report

The energy efficiency report for manufactured fenestration products would include:
- **Name of product** (e.g., casement window, sliding glass door)
- **Brand name**
- **Model number/identification code**
- **Product gateway model size**
- **NFRC CPD number** (if applicable)
- **Name of the manufacturer**
- **Name of the certification body** whose verification mark would be affixed to the product
- **U-factor of the total assembly in W/mK** (if composite, U-factor of individual units can be reported)
- **SHGC of the total assembly** (if composite, SHGC of individual units can be reported)
- **VT of the total assembly** (if composite, VT of individual units can be reported)

*This report must be submitted by the dealer to NRCan **before** the product is imported into Canada or traded inter-provincially for the first time.*

### Import Report

A dealer importing these products into Canada would include the following information on the customs release document:
- **Name of product**
- **Model number**
- **Brand name**
- **Address of the dealer importing the product**
- **Purpose for which the product is being imported** (e.g., for sale/lease in Canada without modification; for sale/lease in Canada after modification to comply with energy efficiency standards; or for use as a component in a product being exported from Canada)

## Comments Invited

NRCan is seeking feedback on:
- **Scope and extent of regulated product classes** (e.g., potential issues with skylights, doors, basement windows).
- **Additional burden** (financial or administrative) from product testing by SCC accredited certification bodies.
- Whether permitting **NFRC accredited certification bodies** would reduce compliance burden.
- Any concerns related to **not requiring certified air leakage or Energy Rating (ER) values** as mandatory fields on the standardized label (these would be optional).

NRCan encourages public and stakeholder engagement. Please forward this bulletin to any interested parties or groups who may be impacted. Register for the mailing list for updates on amendments, technical bulletins, and webinars.

Additional information on *Canadas Energy Efficiency Regulations* and a list of SCC accredited certification bodies can be found on NRCans website.

**Comments are welcome by September 13, 2024.** All correspondence should be forwarded to:

Natural Resources Canada
Office of Energy Efficiency
580 Booth Street
Ottawa, ON, K1A 0E4

**E-mail**: EEregulations-reglementEE@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca

*Email subject heading to be: Bulletin  Manufactured Fenestration Products  Produits de fentrage manufacturs  May 2024 mai*