# Internet (VoIP) phones

## Energy Efficiency Overview

ENERGY STAR certified VoIP phones (also known as Internet phones) **use up to 40% less energy** than a standard VoIP phone and can power down at night.

## Types of ENERGY STAR Certified VoIP Phones

*   **Hardware or desktop corded telephone**: These look like conventional phones with a handset. They connect to the network using their own Ethernet connection and do not need a computer to function.
*   **Wireless**: Consists of a handset, cradle, and battery with built-in Wi-Fi that allows units to connect to a wireless network in home or office. They have a longer range than traditional cordless phones, but less than cellular phones as they rely on wireless routers or access points to make calls.
*   **Conference**: A VoIP phone without a handset that uses a speakerphone for all communications and is mainly used for conference calls.

## Energy-Saving Features

*   **Energy saving mode**: Allows the phone to power down and enter into off mode at designated times or during periods of inactivity to save you even more on your utility bills!
*   **Wide variety of features**: Including a keypad for dialing, an LCD display screen, multiple programmable feature keys, ports for network and/or computer connections, multiple language support, built-in headset jack, personalized ring tones, and data encryption.

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict **efficiency specifications** and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

## Finding Certified Products

Start your research using the [ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-telephones/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) to find and compare certified phones. *(You will be redirected to the U.S. ENERGY STAR website. Click VoIP under Product Type when searching).* 

## Helpful Tips

*   Make sure your service provider is compatible with your phone system.
*   If your computer and VoIP phone need to share a single Ethernet connection, you will need dual RJ45 Ethernet ports.
*   Decide what features and functions you need in your phone before buying.
*   If you will be using Power over Ethernet you will need a VoIP phone that supports that technology.
