# Step 5: Request and Receive Your Grant

> **Closed: Canada Greener Homes Grant.** December 31, 2025, was the last day to submit your documents. Requests submitted by the deadline will continue to be processed.

## 1. Review Post-Retrofit EnerGuide Evaluation Results and Confirm Grant Amount

The post-retrofit evaluation includes:

-   an **EnerGuide home rating and a label**
-   an updated **Homeowner Information Sheet** that lists improvements to your homes energy efficiency and its EnerGuide rating

Energy advisors confirm which retrofits were undertaken and provide an estimate of the grant amount you may be eligible for. The energy advisor was also required to provide you with these reports by mail or email. It takes at least 14 business days for them to reach you.

Your service organization is also required to submit your reports to the Canada Greener Homes portal. Reports were accessible to homeowners in the portal.

It could take a minimum of 30 days after your post-retrofit EnerGuide evaluation for the service organization to submit this information to the portal.

## 2. Upload Your Receipts and Documents

Homeowners were notified when the service organizations submitted all the necessary information into the Canada Greener Homes portal, allowing them to review their post-retrofit EnerGuide evaluation documents.

At this point, homeowners were required to upload the following documents, so eligible retrofits could be verified.

**Mandatory documents**

-   receipts for your pre- and post-retrofit EnerGuide evaluations
-   all receipts and invoices, **marked paid in full**, for products purchased and for installation costs

Receipts need to be submitted in the portal.

**Other recommended documents**

You may upload these documents if you have them and if applicable for your retrofits:

-   for grid-connected solar photovoltaic systems, a copy of the letter of approval or permission for interconnection issued by the local electrical or building authority
-   It is highly recommended that you have an attestation form (if applicable for your retrofits) confirming that:
    -   [the mechanical system has been installed by a trained and licensed professional](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/sites/nrcan/files/science-and-data/funding-and-partnerships/greener-homes/MechanicalSystem-Contractorqualification_Final.pdf) (PDF, 116 KB)
    -   [the ground source heat pump system was installed in accordance with CSA standards](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/sites/nrcan/files/science-and-data/funding-and-partnerships/greener-homes/GroundSourceHeatPumpDesignandInstallation_Final.pdf) (PDF, 117 KB)
    -   [the air source heat pump or cold climate air source heat pump system is capable of distributing heat to the entire home](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/sites/nrcan/files/science-and-data/funding-and-partnerships/greener-homes/AirSourceHeatPumporColdClimateAirSourceHeatPumpDesignandInstallation.pdf) (PDF, 83 KB)
    -   For an off-grid system, you should ensure that the system was designed and installed in accordance with local building and electrical codes.

*Note: Mechanical systems include ground source heat pumps, air source heat pumps, cold climate air source heat pumps, heat pump water heaters, furnaces (eligible for northern and off-grid community residents only), and boilers (eligible for northern and off-grid community residents only).*

You will need to keep copies of your documents **until March 31, 2028**. The federal grants are not taxable and do not have to be declared as income.

## 3. Request Your Grant

After you submit all your receipts and documents (paid receipts for your eligible retrofits, and for the pre- and post-EnerGuide evaluations, and all other required documents), you could request your grant through the online Canada Greener Homes portal by clicking on the green button marked Receipts have been uploaded, and I am ready to request the grant.

Our program officers then review your file and documents to confirm the total amount of the grant eligible for the retrofits you have completed. If there are any outstanding documents or questions, they will contact you directly.

The review can take up to **40 business days**.

The amount of your grant depends on which retrofits were completed and the total of your qualifying expenses. In no case will the grant exceed your qualifying costs.

### Safe environment for the Canada Greener Homes Grant

The Canada Greener Homes Grant operates an environment that is free from discrimination, harassment, hate and otherwise inappropriate conduct. Inappropriate language, images and other forms of communication or behaviour directed toward the program, its staff, third-party delivery partners, or participants will not be tolerated and is grounds for dismissal of the application or the applicant from the program and its benefits.

## 4. Confirm and Receive Your Grant

As the final step in the process, officers review your file, and an email is sent from NRCan with the funding decision. To confirm your grant total and receive your grant, log in to the portal and click on Accept Payment.

At this stage, your retrofit journey is complete. It can take up to **30 business days** to process your payment, and then the grant cheque is mailed to your address.

> **Disclaimer for banking information**
> We do not ask for banking information. Please contact us if you have questions or concerns.

**Previous step:** [Post-retrofit EnerGuide home evaluation](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/step-4-post-retrofit-energuide-home-evaluation)

## Canada Greener Homes Initiative

-   Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program: helps low- to median-income homeowners switch from oil heating to an eligible electric heat pump system. Details vary by province and territory.
-   Canada Greener Homes Affordability Program: helps low- to median-income homeowners and tenants reduce their energy bills and greenhouse gas emissions through no-cost home retrofits, delivered through provincial and territorial partners, with additional support for Indigenous organizations.

### Useful links

-   [Eligible retrofits and grant amounts](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligible-retrofits-grant-amounts)
-   [Eligible products lists](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligible-products-home-retrofit)
-   [How the grant process works](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/grant-process-works#G1)
-   [Troubleshoot your IT issues with the Canada Greener Homes portal](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/technical-assistance-canada-greener-homes-initiative)
-   [Log in to the portal](https://greenerhomes-maisonecologiques.canada.ca/lcs/LCSSetLocale?portal=ho)

We strive to create and maintain a service experience where everyone is treated with dignity, decency and respect. If there is an opportunity for us to improve in any of these areas, please let us know.

## Contact Us

**Grant inquiries**

-   Phone: 1-833-674-8282
-   TTY: 1-800-465-7735
-   Email: [canadagreenerhomesgrant-subventionmaisonsvertes@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:canadagreenerhomesgrant-subventionmaisonsvertes@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca)

**Business hours**
Monday to Friday: 8:00 am to 8:00 pm (Eastern time)

**Loan inquiries**

-   Phone: 1-866-292-9517
-   Email: [Questions@cghli.ca](mailto:Questions@cghli.ca)

**Social media**
Follow @NRCan for the latest updates
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/NRCan)
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/EnvironmentandNaturalResourcesinCanada)
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/company/natural-resources-canada)
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/user/NaturalResourcesCa)

**Accessibility**
The Canada Greener Homes Initiative is committed to providing a barrier-free application process. We encourage you to advise us of any accommodations you may need. Please contact us either by email, toll-free number or TTY and we will happily assist you.

**Date modified:** 2026-02-13