# Appliances for residential use

When buying appliances, the **cost of energy to operate a product over its lifetime is just as important as how much it costs to buy it**.

**Make the switch to an ENERGY STAR certified appliance to cut your electricity bill and reduce your carbon footprint.** All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to strict efficiency standards and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

## Get ENERGY STAR Appliances

The following ENERGY STAR certified products are available in Canada:

-   Air purifiers (cleaners)
-   Clothes dryers
-   Clothes washers (washing machines)
-   Dishwashers
-   Freezers
-   Refrigerators
-   Cordless phone
-   Tablet computer
-   Television
-   Water cooler

## How to Pick the Most Energy Efficient Appliances

-   **Look for the ENERGY STAR symbol**: The easiest way to identify an efficient appliance is to look for the ENERGY STAR symbol.
-   The **ENERGY STAR Most Efficient designation** is offered each year to products that are the best of the best  the top energy performers in their class.
    *   _Learn more about ENERGY STAR Most Efficient._
-   **Use the ENERGY STAR Product Finder** to find certified products. _(Note: you will be redirected to the U.S. ENERGY STAR website. Click Canada as your market)._
-   **See what ENERGY STAR products are most efficient**.
-   **Compare models using the EnerGuide label**: Use the EnerGuide label on all major appliances to compare a models energy consumption to similar models.
-   **Check with our list of ENERGY STAR participating retailers and manufacturers**.

## Maintaining the Appliances in Your Home

-   **Buy the right size**: Larger models typically use more energy, so purchase one that is appropriately sized for your needs.
-   **Keep appliances clean**: For example, empty the lint trap on your dryer to increase air flow and clean the coils on your fridge to maintain airflow.

## Canadians Home Appliances

Household appliances, such as fridges, freezers, dishwashers and water coolers, **account for up to 14.1% of the energy used in the average Canadian home**.

### Distribution of Residential Energy Use in Canada 2019

_A pie chart representing energy consumed in the average Canadian home is divided into five sections:_

-   **Space heating**: 63.6%
-   **Water heating**: 17.2%
-   **Appliances**: 14.1%
-   **Lighting**: 3.5%
-   **Space cooling**: 1.6%

## Regulated Home Appliances

Canadas [Energy Efficiency Regulations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/guide-canada-s-energy-efficiency-regulations) establish minimum performance standards for energy efficiency and help eliminate the least efficient products from the Canadian marketplace.

Products regulated but **not** eligible for ENERGY STAR certification include:

-   Integrated washer-dryers
-   Miscellaneous refrigeration products such as coolers and wine chillers
-   Cooking appliances, including electric and gas ranges, microwave ovens, cooktops and ovens

_Many types of home appliances must meet minimum energy efficiency standards as regulated under Canadas Energy Efficiency Regulations. See more information about the regulations that help eliminate the least efficient products from the Canadian market._

---

_The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada._