# Heat Pump Water Heaters

## Buy ENERGY STAR to save you money!

An **ENERGY STAR certified heat pump water heater** is up to **four times more efficient** and uses up to **70% less energy**, on average, than a standard electrical water heater. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

### Key Features

*   Heat pump water heater (HPWH) technology does not generate heat directly. It moves heat from one place to another. Heat is taken from the air in the basement or utility room (or sometimes from outside) and transferred to a tank of water.
*   Some HPWHs can be added to a conventional electric storage tank water heater.

### Recommendations

*   Start your research using the [ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-water-heaters/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) to find and compare certified heat pump water heaters.
    *   _NOTE: You will be redirected to the US ENERGY STAR website. Make sure to click Heat Pump under Type when searching._
*   Learn more in the booklet *[Water Heater Guide](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/sites/nrcan/files/oee/files/pdf/equipment/WaterHeaterGuide_e.pdf)*.

### The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to strict efficiency standards and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

---

_The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada._