# Water Coolers Energy Efficiency Report

## ENERGY STAR Certification

**Buy ENERGY STAR to save you money!**

An **ENERGY STAR certified water cooler** uses **30% less energy**, on average, than a standard model. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

## Key Features of ENERGY STAR Certified Water Coolers

*   Units with **on-demand features** save energy by providing hot and cool water upon request rather than needlessly storing conditioned water in internal tanks.
*   Consume less **standby energy**.

## Research and Comparison

Start your research using the [ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-pool-pumps/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) to find and compare certified water coolers.

_Note: You will be redirected to the US ENERGY STAR website._

## Helpful Tips

*   **Point of use water coolers** are a little more expensive and more complicated than bottled water coolers, but they eliminate monthly water delivery bills and lifting large bottles.
*   If the taste of your tap water is unappealing, point of use water coolers are available that come with **built-in filtration systems** to remove silt, odours, chlorine and other chemicals.

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are:

*   Tested to meet strict efficiency specifications.
*   Certified by an independent third party.
*   Perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

## Trademark Information

The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.
