# Dehumidifiers

## Buy ENERGY STAR to save you money!

An **ENERGY STAR certified dehumidifier** uses nearly **15% less energy**, on average, than a standard model. ENERGY STAR certified models are available for both portable and whole home dehumidifiers. Portable room dehumidifiers are used to dehumidify a single room or space while whole-home dehumidifiers use your homes air ducts to dehumidify one or more rooms and are often permanent. Dehumidifiers that have earned the *ENERGY STAR Most Efficient* designation are the best of the best  theyll save you more energy than standard models. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

### Key features

- Use more efficient refrigeration coils, compressors, and fans than conventional models.
- All ENERGY STAR dehumidifiers include a built-in **humidistat**, a device that allows you to set the desired relative humidity (RH) level that you would like for the room. Once the room reaches the desired RH level, the dehumidifier will cycle on and off automatically to maintain the level.
- Some dehumidifiers come equipped with a fitting that allows you to hook a hose directly to your floor drain or sump pump, avoiding the need to empty the water reservoir.
- Portable room dehumidifiers can be easily moved to where they are needed.

*Start your research using the [ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool to find and compare certified dehumidifiers](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-dehumidifiers/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) (NOTE: you will be redirected to the U.S. ENERGY STAR website.)*

### Helpful tips

- Buy a model with the **highest integrated energy factor** (IEF) for best efficiency. The energy efficiency of dehumidifiers is measured by its integrated energy factor, in litres of water removed per kilowatt-hour (kWh) of energy consumed or L/kWh.
- If choosing a whole-home dehumidifier, hire a professional to ensure that the unit is sized and installed correctly.
- If dehumidifying an area where the temperature is lower than 18C, consider buying a product meant for use at lower temperatures.
- Observe all manufacturer warnings regarding electrical safety and keep drain hoses away from electrical cords and connections.
- Use the chart below to choose the right model for the space: more space and moisture requires a model with higher capacity.
- Close doors and windows. Outdoor air can reduce your unit's efficiency.
- Clean your unit regularly, especially the filters, to maximize efficiency.
- Locate away from sources of dust and dirt, which can clog coils and grills.

### Selecting a dehumidifier for your home: what you need to know

The capacity of the dehumidifier required depends on two factors: the **size** of the space to be dehumidified and the **conditions** that exist in the space without dehumidification.

Remember: **Its better to oversize than undersize**!

| Room Conditions                      | Recommended Capacity Range, litres per day |
| :----------------------------------- | :----------------------------------------- |
| **Small-medium room** (<185 m)     | **Large Room** (>185 m)                   |
| **Slightly to Moderately Damp**      | 10 - 15                                    | >15 |
| * space feels damp and has musty odor
|* 50-75% relative humidity           |                                            |     |
| **Very Damp**                        | 11 - 20                                    | >20 |
| * space consistently feels and smells damp
|* 75-90% relative humidity           |                                            |     |
| **Wet**                              | 15 -25                                     | >25 |
| * Walls or floor sweat
* **High-load conditions such as laundry**
|* 90-100% relative humidity          |                                            |     |

*If dehumidifier capacity is not measured in metric units, remember: two pints equal approximately one litre.*

### Whats in a label?

Dehumidifiers in Canada can have two labels:

- The **ENERGY STAR symbol** means the model is highly energy efficient.
- The **EnerGuide label** shows the models energy consumption and how it compares to similar models. Learn more about [EnerGuide labels for appliances](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/appliances-energuide/).

### The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict efficiency specifications and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

### Regulations set the energy efficiency minimum

Dehumidifiers are subject to Canada's *Energy Efficiency Regulations*, which set a minimum performance standard for their energy efficiency. Find details in the [Guide to the Regulations](http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/regulations-codes-standards/6861).

---
*The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.*
