# Buying ENERGY STAR Certified Products

**ENERGY STAR is the simple choice for energy efficiency.** It instantly identifies products that have been certified as energy efficient.

## Reasons to Buy ENERGY STAR Certified Models:

*   **Save time**: The ENERGY STAR symbol is an easy way to find top energy performers when youre shopping for products.
*   **Save energy**: Products are typically in the top 15 to 30% of their class for energy performance.
*   **Save money**: Reducing your energy use means lowering your electricity bills and saving you money.
*   **Save the environment**: Certified models use less energy, lowering the amount of greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere.

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

*   You can be sure you are getting an eco-friendly product, because certified products are tested to meet strict [efficiency standards](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/technical-specifications) and are certified by an independent third party.
*   Certification also ensures that the products are high quality, meaning that they perform the same as, or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

## How to Find ENERGY STAR Certified Products

*   When youre shopping, [look for the ENERGY STAR symbol](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/about/look-symbol). It usually appears in cyan blue and white, or black and white.
*   Youll find the symbol on products or their packaging, as part of an [EnerGuide label](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/energuide-label), in product literature, and in advertising, promotional or online material from [Participants](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/list-energy-star-canada-participants).
*   You can also search for certified products using the [ENERGY STAR Product Finder](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/). _(You will be redirected to our shared certified product listing on the U.S. ENERGY STAR website. Click Canada as your market)._

---

_The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada._