# HVAC & Energy Systems

## Overview
Innovative technologies for the **heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration (HVACR)** of Canadas homes and buildings are crucial to achieve **market-feasible net-zero energy solutions by 2030** and to **reduce electrical demand at peak times**.

## Energy Consumption Statistics

-   **Commercial and Institutional Facilities**:
    -   Approximately **450,000 facilities** across Canada.
    -   Energy demand grew by **over 35%** between 1990-2004, due to increased floor space and auxiliary equipment use.
-   **Residential Sector**:
    -   Approximately **12 million dwellings** in Canada.
    -   Total energy consumption rose **10%**.
    -   Represented an annual energy bill of approximately **$6 billion** in 2004.

## Residential and Commercial Building Energy Use by End-Use (2005)

*This data drives CanmetENERGYs research.*

| End-Use Category              | Percentage of Energy Use |
| :---------------------------- | :----------------------- |
| Space Heating                 | **56%**                  |
| Water Heating                 | **14%**                  |
| House Appliances              | **7%**                   |
| _(38% of which is Plug Loads)_ |                          |\
| Lighting                      | **7%**                   |\
| Space Cooling                 | **5%**                   |\
| Commercial Auxiliary Motors   | **3%**                   |\

## CanmetENERGY Research Innovation Areas

CanmetENERGY focuses on efficiency gains in HVACR equipment and systems, leading to economic benefits and greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions. Key areas include:

-   **Integrated Systems**: Integrated space, water, and ventilation systems.
-   **High-Efficiency Equipment**: High-efficiency condensing commercial heating equipment.
-   **Micro-Cogeneration Systems**: Potential for **3 times lower GHG emissions** compared to conventional central electricity generation plants.
-   **Demand Management & Load Shifting**: Strategies incorporating heat and electricity storage, advanced controls, energy cascading, and renewable energy technology integration.
-   **Standards and Regulation**: Engagement in developing standards and regulations to ensure safe access to equipment.

## Additional Resources

-   [Integrated Energy Systems Lab](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/science-data/science-research/research-centres/integrated-energy-systems-lab)
-   [Integrated Mechanical Systems](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/building-energy-efficiency/integrated-mechanical-systems)

*For more information, refer to the [publication section](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/maps-tools-publications/publications/energy-publications) or [contact us](http://contact-contactez.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/index.cfm?sid=2).*

**Date modified**: 2024-12-23