# Electric motors (1 to 500 HP/0.746 to 375 kW)

## Energy Efficiency Regulations

### Regulatory definition
An electric motor is defined as a machine that converts electrical power into rotational mechanical power, including any motor incorporated into another product (whether or not that other product is an energy-using product). It must meet the following criteria:

-   Is an **electric three-phase induction design**.
-   Is one of the following designs:
    -   A **NEMA design A, B or C** with a three- or four-digit NEMA frame number.
    -   An **enclosed NEMA design A, B or C** with a NEMA frame number of 56.
    -   An **IEC design N or H** with an IEC frame number of 80 or above.
-   Has a nominal output power of **not less than 0.75 kW (1 HP)** and **not more than 375 kW (500 HP)**.
-   Has a **cage or squirrel-cage design**.
-   Is rated for **continuous duty or S1 operation**.
-   Is designed to operate at a **single speed**.
-   Has a nominal voltage of **not more than 600 V AC**.
-   Has a nominal frequency of **50 Hz, 50/60 Hz or 60 Hz**.
-   Has a **two-, four-, six- or eight-pole construction**.
-   Has an **open or enclosed construction**.
-   Has an **IP code from 00 to 67**.

### Types of motors included:
-   Close-coupled pump motor
-   Fire pump motor
-   Integral gear assembly
-   Partial motor
-   Totally enclosed non ventilated motor (TENV)
-   Brake motor
-   Motor with separately powered blower
-   Vertical solid shaft motor
-   Vertical hollow shaft motor
-   Immersible motor (_a motor designed to operate continuously in free air, but can operate continuously for a period of at least 30 minutes while completely submerged_)
-   Explosion proof motor
-   Motor with sleeve bearing, thrust bearing, non-standard base, non-standard endshields or flanges, encapsulated windings, moisture resistant windings or sealed windings

### Does not include:
-   Air-over motor (_a motor that is cooled by air that is forced over the motor by a fan or blower that is not an integral part of the motor_)
-   Liquid-cooled motor
-   Component sets of a motor
-   Inverter-only motor
-   Submersible motor (_a motor that is designed to operate continuously only while immersed_)

### Compliance date
-   **Manufactured on or after February 3, 1995** for fire pump motors.
-   **Manufactured on or after June 1, 2017** for medical imaging motors.
-   **Manufactured on or after June 1, 2016** for all other motors.

_For models manufactured prior, refer to the Regulations._

### Compliant product models
[Electric motors](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=ElectricMotors) as listed on NRCans searchable database.

### Testing standard
-   **CSA C390-10** _Test methods, marking requirements, and energy efficiency levels for three-phase induction motors._
-   or **IEC 60034-2-1** _Rotating electrical machines  Part 2-1: Standard methods for determining losses and efficiency from tests (excluding machines for traction vehicles)_, as amended from time to time.
-   or **IEEE 112** _Standard Test Procedure for Polyphase Induction Motors and Generators_, as amended from time to time.

_Note: For non-dated test standards, use the most recent version._

### Energy efficiency standard

| Product type           | Testing standard                   | Energy efficiency standard | Period of manufacture            |
| :--------------------- | :--------------------------------- | :------------------------- | :------------------------------- |
| **Fire pump motor**    | CSA C390-10 or<br>IEEE 112 or IEC 60034-2-1 | CSA C390-10, Table 2       | On or after February 3, 1995     |
| **Medical imaging motor** | CSA C390-10 or<br>IEEE 112 or IEC 60034-2-1 | NEMA MG-1, Table 12-12     | On or after June 1, 2017         |
| **All other motors**   | CSA C390-10 or<br>IEEE 112 or IEC 60034-2-1 | NEMA MG-1, Table 12-12     | On or after June 1, 2016         |

_NEMA MG-1: NEMA Standards Publication No. MG 1-2014 Motors and Generators_

### Energy efficiency report requirements
-   **Name of product**
-   **Brand name**
-   **Model number**
-   **Manufacturer**
-   **Name of the certification body or province** whose verification mark will be on the product or its package.
-   Whether a **mathematical model** as defined in the Regulations was used to generate any of the information provided below.
-   **Nominal output power** in kilowatts (horsepower).
-   **Number of poles**.
-   **Construction**  open or enclosed.
-   **Nominal efficiency value** at full load at 60 Hz.
-   **NEMA or IEC design** of motor.
-   **Motor configuration** (i.e. fire pump motor, medical imaging motor or another configuration).

_This document does not constitute part of the Energy Efficiency Act (Act) or its associated regulations. This document is an administrative document that is intended to facilitate compliance by the regulated party with the Act and its associated regulations. This document is not intended to provide legal advice regarding the interpretation of the Act or its associated regulations. If a regulated party has questions about their legal obligations or responsibilities under the Act or its associated regulations, they should seek the advice of legal counsel._