# Tankless Water Heaters

*Information on ENERGY STAR certified tankless water heaters.*

## Energy Savings

An **ENERGY STAR certified tankless water heater** uses **30% less energy**, on average, than a storage tank type. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

## Key Features

-   **Energy Factor (EF) Rating**: Rated with an energy factor (EF). The higher the EF, the more efficient the water heater.
-   **On-Demand Heating**: No storage tank. They heat flowing water only when required, using either an electric element or a gas burner, essentially providing endless hot water.

## Product Comparison and Research

-   **Product Finder Tool**: Start your research [using the ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool to find and compare certified water heaters](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-water-heaters/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on).
    *Note: You will be redirected to the US ENERGY STAR website. Make sure to click Gas Tankless under Type when searching.*

## Helpful Tips

-   **Regular Servicing**: Get your water heater serviced once every year or two by a qualified professional (Consult your owners manual for detailed information).
-   **Proper Sizing**: Buy the right size. Consult with an experienced plumber to estimate the hot water demands in your home.
-   **Further Reading**: Learn more in the booklet [*Water Heater Guide*](/sites/nrcan/files/oee/files/pdf/equipment/WaterHeaterGuide_e.pdf).

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are:

-   Tested to meet strict efficiency specifications.
-   Certified by an independent third party.
-   Perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

---

*The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.*

**Date Modified**: 2025-03-19