# What to Expect with an Inspection

## Why does NRCan's Compliance Operations perform inspections?

*   **Verify compliance** with the Energy Efficiency Regulations
*   **Verify the presence** of required labels and marks
*   **Follow up** on complaints, or a previous inspection

## Prior to an Inspection

1.  Your establishment may receive an inspection notice from NRCan.
2.  An inspector arrives at your establishment and identifies him/herself.
3.  The inspector goes over the scope of the inspection.

## During an Inspection

1.  The inspector determines if regulatory requirements are met.
2.  The inspector documents observations with notes and photos and may request electronic records to review.
3.  The inspector lets you know when you can expect to receive a copy of the report.

## After an Inspection

1.  The inspector contacts you to discuss the results and provides a copy of the report.
2.  You are asked to provide, in writing, corrective actions that will be taken (if non-compliance is detected).
3.  The inspector schedules a follow-up inspection as needed.

### Questions?

Contact **Compliance Operations**:
[complianceops-opsconformite@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:complianceops-opsconformite@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca)

---

*This document does not constitute legislation. In the event of any inconsistency or conflict between the legislation and this document, the legislation takes precedence. This document is an administrative document that is intended to facilitate compliance by the regulated party with the legislation and the applicable administrative policies.*
