# Integrated clothes washer-dryers

## Designed for small or tight spaces

In Canada, integrated clothes washer-dryers:

*   Meet minimum performance standards set by Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations*
*   Have an **EnerGuide label** that says how much energy that model uses

### Defined by single control panel

Integrated washer-dryers are typically used where space is limited or where installation obstacles exist. They are available in standard and compact sizes, and fall into two types:

*   An **integrated washer-dryer** consists of a washer component and a dryer component that have a **single power source** and **single control panel**. The components may sit one on top of the other or be set side-by-side.
*   A **combination washer-dryer** uses the same drum for washing and drying. It has a **single power source** and **single control panel**. _(Combination units are also considered integrated units.)_

_Note: Stackable units with separate control panels and power connections do not fall under this definition._

### Look for ENERGY STAR in the future

Currently, there is **no ENERGY STAR qualification specification** for either integrated or combination washer-dryers.

A test procedure is being developed to accurately measure the energy and water consumption of these integrated units so that an ENERGY STAR technical specification can be developed.

### Use EnerGuide to compare energy efficiency

The **EnerGuide label** is mandatory for electric integrated washer-dryers in Canada and must be easy to see on the outside or inside of the product.

**The label shows:**

*   **Product type**
*   **Model number**
*   **Average energy consumption** in kilowatt hours (kWh) per year

A scale on the label shows how the models energy use compares with similar models: **the lower the number, the more efficient the product.**

_Gas washer-dryers powered by gas and condensing dryers are not subject to Canadas Energy Efficiency Regulations and, therefore, do not display an EnerGuide label._

### Check the \"second price tag\"

The first price tag is the sticker price. The second price tag is the appliance's **annual or lifetime operating cost**.

*   Use NRCans [calculator for new appliances](http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/residential/personal/appliances/energy-cost-calculator.cfm) to see the cost of operating different models of clothes washers for one year.
*   Compare current models of electric integrated washer-dryers available in Canada in our [searchable product list](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/).
*   Learn more about [EnerGuide](/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide).

### Regulations set the energy efficiency minimum

Standard electric integrated washer-dryers, including combination washer-dryers, are subject to Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations*, which set a performance standard for their energy consumption. This helps to eliminate the least efficient products from the Canadian market.

*   View the [performance standard](http:/oee.nrcan.gc.ca/regulations/products/6685) for electric clothes dryers in Canada.
*   Learn more about how Canadas [*Energy Efficiency Regulations*](http:/oee.nrcan.gc.ca/regulations/17311) work.

---

_The **ENERGY STAR name and symbol** are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada._