# Stream videos smarter

## **Buy ENERGY STAR certified streaming equipment to save you money!**

Did you know that how you stream your media could have an impact on your energy bill? No matter how you choose to stream your media, ENERGY STAR can help you to stream smarter with certified digital media players, smart TVs, laptops and tablets. On average, **ENERGY STAR certified streaming devices use 25% less energy** than standard models.

Canadians love watching videos online  perhaps more than in any other country. We spend an average of 22.4 hours per month watching online videos, which is higher than the U.S. average of 20.4 hours or the global average of 14.8 hours. More than 50% of Canadians stream online video more than one hour per day, with 92% of younger Canadians streaming daily.

### Benefits of using a digital media player (DMP)

New ways to watch TV other than cable TV are available, allowing Canadians to stream media online in various ways. Digital media players (DMPs), also known as over-the-top (OTT) devices, stream content to TV sets from online services (e.g., Netflix, Hulu, Amazon Prime). DMPs are inexpensive, easy to use, and quickly installed. **They save energy, using four times less energy than a cable box and 11 times less energy than a computer!**

### Helpful tips

*   **Use a tablet.** When streaming content to a small screen, consider using a tablet instead of a laptop or desktop. **Laptops use four times more energy while desktops use 15 times more energy than a tablet.**
*   **Smart TVs are a smart choice.** When streaming content to a big screen, a smart TV uses the least amount of energy compared to other streaming devices. *(Use an [ENERGY STAR certified smart TV](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/list-certified-products/televisions) to save more).* 
*   **Use game consoles for gaming  not streaming.** Use your game console for gaming and leave streaming to other devices. **A game console uses 15 times more energy than a DMP and four times more energy than traditional cable/satellite set-top box.**

---

The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.

**Date modified:** 2025-07-23