# Home Renovation Savings Program

## Making home renovations more affordable

Save on Energy and Enbridge Gas, supported by the Ontario government, have partnered to deliver the **Home Renovation Savings** program to help Ontarians improve home efficiency* and comfort. Whether you heat your home with electricity, natural gas, oil, propane, or wood, you can access rebates for energy-saving upgrades like **insulation, heat pumps, smart thermostats, solar panels,** as well as **energy-efficient appliances**.

## Your upgrades, your way

Homeowners will now have more choice, with flexible options for single and bundled upgrades for greater savings. You can choose to complete a home energy assessment and bundle up, plus, you can also complete single upgrades that help you save.

### Bundle and save!

Start with a home energy assessment, then complete two or more upgrades to receive your rebates.

*   **Home energy assessment**: Get **$600 back**
*   **Insulation**: Up to **$7,700**
*   **Windows and doors**: Get **$100 back** per rough opening
*   **Air sealing**: Up to **$250**
*   **Heat pump water heaters**: Get **$500 back** on qualified heat pump water heaters

_Windows, doors and heat pump water heaters must be an ENERGY STAR certified model._

### Single upgrades

Skip the home energy assessment. Receive rebates on eligible energy-efficiency upgrades.

*   **Cold climate air source heat pump**: Up to **$7,500**
*   **Ground source heat pump**: Up to **$12,000**
*   **Smart thermostat**: Get **$100**
*   **Solar panels and battery storage**: Up to **$10,000**
*   **Appliances**: Up to **$200 back**
*   **Attic insulation**: Get **$1,250**

_The heat pump you choose must be on Natural Resources Canadas qualified products list._

---

*   _Any references to cost or energy savings are based on the assumption the participant is reducing their energy use through participation in the Home Renovation Savings program._
*   _ Additional terms and conditions apply._
*   _ Rebate amount determined based on size of heat pump installed._
*   _ SAVE ON ENERGY and HOME RENOVATION SAVINGS are trademarks of the Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). SAVE ON ENERGY is a brand of the IESO and is supported by the Government of Ontario._