# Canada Greener Homes Affordability Program

<section class=\"alert alert-danger\">
<p>**Be wary of fraudulent or high-pressure sales tactics**</p>

<p>Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) has not approved third parties to make unsolicited contact with homeowners to register for or participate in the Canada Greener Homes Affordability Program (CGHAP). The Government of Canada, NRCan and its family of brands (ENERGY STAR, EnerGuide) never solicit over the telephone, or by email or go door-to-door asking to enter Canadians homes to inspect, sell, or rent heating and cooling products. EnerGuide home energy evaluations are performed by licensed service organizations only at the request of homeowners. [Learn how to recognize energy scams](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/recognize-energy-scams).</p>
</section>

## On this page

- [No-cost energy efficiency retrofits for your home](#a1a)
- [How to participate in your province or territory](#a1b)
- [Additional support for Indigenous organizations](#a1c)
- [Other energy savings programs](#a1d)
- [Contact information](#a1e)

## No-cost energy efficiency retrofits for your home

The **Canada Greener Homes Affordability Program (CGHAP)** will provide low-to-median-income homeowners and tenants with **no-cost home retrofits**, such as insulation and heat pumps.

The program will start to be delivered in **2025** through participating provinces and territories, with additional support for Indigenous organizations.

CGHAP will use a **direct-install approach**, meaning that the program will be delivered to participants by selected organizations that will handle all the logistics and costs associated with planning and delivering home retrofits to reduce energy bills.

## How to participate in your province or territory

**Manitoba residents** can now apply through their province. For details on eligibility and how to apply, visit the [Manitoba program page](https://efficiencymb.ca/my-home/energy-efficiency-assistance-program/).

Links to provincial and territorial programs will be listed here as they become available.

**Households** seeking to apply for CGHAP-funded retrofits must submit applications to the relevant program in their province or territory. The Government of Canada is not accepting applications from households to participate in the program.

## Additional support for Indigenous organizations

CGHAP will provide **dedicated support to regional Indigenous governments and representative organizations**. CGHAP funds will flow through existing funding agreements managed by *Indigenous Services Canada* and *Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada*. This distinctions-based approach aims to reduce administrative requirements and ensure that funds go directly toward the self-determined priorities of First Nations, Mtis and Inuit partners.

In addition to using the funds for retrofits, Indigenous recipients may use CGHAP funding for related training and other residential energy efficiency priorities.

## Other energy saving programs

Explore other home energy savings programs available now: [Save money on energy](https://www.canada.ca/en/campaign/save-money-on-energy.html).

## Contact information

For questions on CGHAP, please email: [CGHAP-PCMAV@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:CGHAP-PCMAV@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca).
