# Humidity LevelsCooling and Ventilating Equipment

Homes today are more airtight than houses of the past. As a result, moisture can build up inside, especially during winter when windows are kept closed. **Dampness, mould growth on walls and heavy condensation on windows are signs of too much moisture.**

Over time, this excess wetness can cause poor air quality and damage the structure of a home.

## Suggestions to Reduce Moisture

*   **Check your humidifier.**
    *   If your furnace has a humidifier, set it lower to reduce humidity levels.
*   **Ventilate.**
    *   Ensure that your clothes dryer vents outside.
    *   Install exhaust fans in bathrooms and kitchens, and make sure the fans vent directly to the outside.
    *   Consider installing a [heat recovery ventilator](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/list-certified-products/heat-energy-recovery-ventilators) to increase ventilation and reduce humidity.
*   **Create less moisture.**
    *   Use lids on pots when cooking.
    *   Keep your showers short.
    *   Store wood outdoors.
*   **Keep moisture out.**
    *   Cover exposed earth floors in basements and crawl spaces with moisture barriers.
    *   Install a sump pump to remove excess moisture under the foundation.
    *   Fix water leaks in the basement.
    *   Make sure the grading slopes away from your house so water does not flow towards the foundation.
    *   Ensure eaves troughs adequately divert water away from your home.
