# Light fixtures (downlights)

ENERGY STAR certified downlights **use 90% less energy**, on average, than traditional models using incandescent light bulbs. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

## What is a downlight?
Downlights are light fixtures that are installed to direct light downward. Downlights can be fully or partially recessed, surface-mounted or suspended. They come in a variety of styles, sizes and light outputs and can be used as general lighting or accent lighting throughout various living spaces.

ENERGY STAR certification only applies to downlights with integrated or built-in LED modules as their light source. This includes downlight retrofit kits within specification.

## Are downlights the same as pot lights?
Downlight and pot light are terms that are often used interchangeably but do have subtle differences. Pot light is generally a Canadian term used for recessed light fixtures. This means while many pot lights can be considered downlights, not all downlights are pot lights. Downlights describes a broader category of lighting fixture that includes a large variety of surface mounted light fixtures in addition to pot lights.

## Key features
-   **Distribute light more efficiently and evenly.**
-   **Are tested for long-term performance and come with a manufacturer-backed warranty of at least three years.**

## What happened to the ENERGY STAR label on light bulbs and other light fixtures?
ENERGY STAR certified light bulbs have been a staple in energy-efficiency products, saving Canadians electricity and money while affording them peace of mind. Little by little, ENERGY STAR standards have continuously raised the bar for energy efficiency in lighting, encouraging manufacturers to make investments, improvements and innovations that have made lighting products higher quality and more efficient.

These high efficiency light bulbs have become the standard used in most household applications. The lighting industry has evolved and reached a point where no further leaps in energy savings are expected. Recognizing this progress, Natural Resources Canada has retired ENERGY STAR certification and labelling for light bulbs and other common light fixtures.

You may continue to see products packaged with the ENERGY STAR logo on store shelves in early 2025 as manufacturers sell through their remaining stock and minimize waste.

## Why should you choose ENERGY STAR?
-   **Reduce your at-home energy consumption**
-   **Save money**
-   **Keep your home comfortable**
-   **Reduce your carbon footprint**

## The ENERGY STAR Promise
All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict [efficiency specifications](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/technical-specifications) and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

Start your research [using the ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool to find and compare](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-light-fixtures/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) certified light fixtures *(You will be redirected to the U.S. ENERGY STAR website)*.

## Related Blog Posts
-   [Simple tips for brighter savings](/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/simple-tips-brighter-savings)
-   [Everything LED](/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/everything)

---

*The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.*

**Date modified**: 2025-03-19