# Battery chargers (uninterruptible power supplies)

**Publication Date**: May 2024

## Technical Bulletin on Amending the Standards

**Webinar**: Tuesday, May 28, 1:00-2:00 pm EDT

In April 2024, the Office of Energy Efficiency at Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) updated its [Forward Regulatory Plan](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/node/21709), which identifies its intention to amend Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations* (the Regulations) to introduce testing and energy efficiency standards for Uninterruptible Power Supplies (UPS) to harmonize with the United States.

This technical bulletin initiates the consultation process to collect stakeholder views on the requirements being considered for UPS. Input received will inform the development of future amendments. NRCan will also conduct a cost-benefit analysis using Canadian market data to assess economic and environmental impacts.

The Government of Canada intends to pre-publish a regulatory proposal in the *Canada Gazette*, Part I, in 2025.

## Background

In Canada, battery chargers manufactured as of June 13, 2019, are subject to the Regulations. However, UPS are not currently defined as an energy-using product in the Regulations.

On August 5, 2016, the United States Department of Energy (U.S. DOE) issued a [notice of proposed rulemaking](https://www.regulations.gov/document/EERE-2016-BT-STD-0022-0007) to add UPS to the scope of battery chargers and introduce energy efficiency standards. NRCan had intended to harmonize, but the U.S. DOE regulations were put on hold. U.S. DOE efficiency standards were ultimately incorporated into the U.S. Federal Register on January 10, 2020, through a [final rule](https://www.regulations.gov/document/EERE-2016-BT-STD-0022-0035), which expanded the scope of battery chargers to include UPS and introduced energy efficiency and testing standards.

Energy efficiency standards for UPS could save energy, reduce energy costs for Canadians, and decrease energy-related greenhouse gas emissions, encouraging efficient product designs.

In 2021, NRCan and the U.S. DOE signed the [Memorandum of Understanding Between the Department of Natural Resources of Canada and the Department of Energy of the United States of America Concerning Cooperation on Energy](https://nrcan.canada.ca/energy/resources/international-energy-cooperation/memorandum-understanding/23749), committing to collaborate on new and updated energy efficiency and testing standards where feasible.

NRCan is considering amending the Regulations to harmonize with the energy efficiency standards, testing standards, and manufacturing dates of the U.S.

## Product Description

A **UPS** means a battery charger consisting of a combination of convertors, switches, and an energy storage that make up a power system for maintaining the continuity of load power in the case of input power failure. It is being considered that UPS be included in the scope and definition of a battery charger.

For the purposes of this bulletin, a **UPS** utilizes a NEMA 1-15P or NEMA 5-15P input plug and includes:
- **Voltage and Frequency Dependent UPS (VFD UPS)**: Produces an AC output where the output voltage and frequency are dependent on input voltage and frequency. It does not provide corrective functions.
- **Voltage Independent UPS (VI UPS)**: Produces an AC output within a specific tolerance band that is independent of under-voltage or over-voltage variations in the input voltage without depleting the stored energy source. The output frequency is dependent on the input frequency.
- **Voltage and Frequency Independent UPS (VFI UPS)**: The device remains in normal mode, producing an AC output voltage and frequency independent of input voltage and frequency variations, protecting the load against adverse effects without depleting the stored energy source.

*NRCan is considering harmonizing with the U.S. definitions of UPS, including VFD UPS, VI UPS, VFI UPS, and back-up battery chargers.*

### Testing Standard

NRCan is considering harmonizing the testing standard for UPS with that of the U.S. using an ambulatory incorporation by reference to:
- **Appendix Y1 to Subpart B, Part 430 of Title 10** to the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, entitled *Uniform Test Method for Measuring the Energy Consumption of Battery Chargers*.

*This would enable NRCan to maintain harmonization with the U.S. DOE.*

### Energy Efficiency Standard

NRCan is considering harmonizing the energy efficiency standards of UPS with those of the U.S. DOE using an ambulatory incorporation by reference to an NRCan technical standards document that would reproduce:
- **Paragraph 430.32(z)(3) of Subpart C, Part 430 of Title 10 to the United States Code of Federal Regulations**, as amended from time to time.

*This would enable NRCan to maintain harmonization with the U.S. DOE.*

**Energy efficiency standards being considered for UPS**

| Product class | Nominal (rated) output power (Prated) | Energy efficiency standards (minimum efficiency) |
|---------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| VFD           | 0 W < Prated  300 W                  | (1.20E-6 * Prated) + (7.17E-04 * Prated) + 0.862 |
| VFD           | 300 W < Prated  700 W                | (7.85E-8 * Prated) + (1.01E-04 * Prated) + 0.946 |
| VFD           | Prated > 700 W                        | (7.23E-9 * Prated) + (7.52E-06 * Prated) + 0.977 |
| VI            | 0 W < Prated  300 W                  | (1.20E-8 * Prated) + (7.19E-04 * Prated) + 0.863 |
| VI            | 300 W < Prated  700 W                | (7.67E-8 * Prated) + (1.05E-04 * Prated) + 0.947 |
| VI            | Prated > 700 W                        | (4.62E-9 * Prated) + (8.54E-06 * Prated) + 0.979 |
| VFI           | 0 W < Prated  300 W                  | (3.13E-8 * Prated) + (1.96E-04 * Prated) + 0.543 |
| VFI           | 300 W < Prated  700 W                | (2.60E-8 * Prated) + (3.65E-04 * Prated) + 0.764 |
| VFI           | Prated > 700 W                        | (1.70E-8 * Prated) + (3.85E-06 * Prated) + 0.876 |

## Important Dates

These modifications to the Regulations would come into force **six months** after the date of publication in the *Canada Gazette*, Part II.

### Regulatory Pathway

NRCan is considering amending the Regulations through Governor in Council amendment. The considered changes would be pre-published in the *Canada Gazette*, Part I, followed by a public comment period. Final publications are typically within a year of their initial public comment period. These changes and the timing of publication are subject to decision-making authorities under the *Energy Efficiency Act*.

## Labelling Requirements

NRCan is **not considering labelling requirements** for UPS.

## Verification Requirements

NRCan would require that products carry a **third-party verification mark** indicating that the product meets the energy efficiency standards and that information to be reported has been verified.

The verification mark is the mark of a Standards Council of Canada accredited certification body that operates an energy efficiency certification program for the product.

## Reporting Requirements

### Energy Efficiency Report

The energy efficiency report for UPS would include the following information:
- **Name of product**: (i.e., uninterruptible power supply)
- **Brand name**
- **Model number**
- **Name of the manufacturer**
- **Name of the certification body** whose verification mark would be affixed to the product
- **Whether a mathematical model was used** to generate any of the product specific information
- **Product class**: (e.g., VFD UPS)
- **Nominal active power**: in watts (W)
- **Nominal apparent power**: in volt-amperes (VA)
- **Nominal input voltage**: in volts (V)
- **Nominal output voltage**: in volts (V)
- **Efficiency**: at 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of reference test load
- **Average load adjusted efficiency**: (of the lowest and highest input dependency modes)

*The Regulations apply to products imported or shipped inter-provincially for sale or lease in Canada. This report must be submitted, by the dealer, to NRCan **before** the product is imported into Canada or traded inter-provincially for the first time.*

### Import Report

A dealer who imports these products into Canada would include the following information on the customs release document:
- **Name of product**
- **Model number**
- **Brand name**
- **Address of the dealer** importing the product
- **Purpose for which the product is being imported**: (i.e., for sale or lease in Canada without modification; for sale or lease in Canada after modification to comply with energy efficiency standards; or for use as a component in a product being exported from Canada)

## Comments Invited

The purpose of this bulletin is to provide stakeholders with the technical detail required to comment on the requirements under consideration for UPS.

If you are aware of any interested parties, please forward them this bulletin. Register to the [mailing list](https://nrcanequipmentdivision.powerappsportals.com/en-US/SubscribeMarketing/) to be notified of upcoming amendments.

[Additional information on Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations*](http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/regulations-codes-standards/6861) including a current list of Standards Council of Canada accredited certification bodies can be found on the Departments website.

We welcome your comments by **September 13, 2024**. All correspondence should be forwarded to:

Natural Resources Canada
Office of Energy Efficiency
580 Booth Street
Ottawa, ON, K1A 0E4

**Email**: [EEregulations-reglementEE@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:EEregulations-reglementEE@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca?subject=Bulletin%20%20UPS%20%20ASC%20%20April%202024%20avril)

**Email subject**: Bulletin  UPS  ASC  May 2024 mai