# Heat pump resources and tools for HVAC professionals

These pages provide the latest information on heat pumps, including tools, videos, and funding programs. Professionals and energy advisors in the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) industry can use this information to help their clients.

Homeowners are enthusiastic about using heat pumps, motivated partly by funding available through Government of Canada initiatives, such as the [Oil to Heat Pump Affordability (OHPA) program](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/oil-heat-pump-affordability-program).

## Eligible heat pumps

A heat pump must meet the mandatory conditions of the OHPA program. It must have been recommended by an HVAC professional or installer and be on one of the following searchable lists of eligible products.

### Searchable product lists

- [Air Source Heat Pumps and Cold Climate Air Source Heat Pumps](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=ASHP1_OHPA&page=1)
- [Ground Source Heat Pumps](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=HP_GS_OHPA&page=1)
- [Cold Climate Air Source Heat Pumps for New Brunswick and Nova Scotia](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=ASHP2_OHPA&page=1)
- [Air Source Heat Pumps and Cold Climate Air Source Heat Pumps for British Columbia](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=ASHP3_OHPA&page=1)
- [Cold Climate Air Source Heat Pumps for Manitoba and Yukon](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=ASHP4_OHPA&page=1)

Visit the OHPA [eligibility criteria](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligibility-criteria-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program) page to find:

- Tips to search the eligible product lists
- Mandatory requirements
- Technical criteria and conditions
- Performance requirements

### Heating efficiency

Heat pumps are regulated products that must meet federal standards for energy efficiency to be imported into Canada or shipped from one province or territory to another for sale or lease.

The federal Energy Efficiency Regulations continue to apply to these products if they are incorporated into a larger unit or machine, even when that unit or machine is an unregulated product.

- [Guide to Canada's Energy Efficiency Regulations](/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/guide-canada-s-energy-efficiency-regulations) (federal standards)
- The [searchable product lists](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/) include all regulated products in Canada

To find the Heating Seasonal Performance Factor 2 (HSPF2) region V of single-phase air source heat pumps that are regulated in Canada, refer to the [Energy efficiency ratings search](https://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/pml-lmp/index.cfm?action=app.search-recherche&appliance=HP_SS_1P) page which includes all current regulated products in Canada.

### Sizing and selecting an air source heat pump

Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) has developed tools that mechanical system designers and renovation contractors can use to size and select a heat pump. The tools apply to both air source heat pumps (ASHP) and cold climate air source heat pumps (ccASHP).

- The [toolkit for sizing and selecting](/energy-efficiency/toolkit-air-source-heat-pump-sizing-selection) an air source heat pump is for mechanical system designers and HVAC professionals to determine the appropriate heat pump for Canadian climates, in both new and existing (retrofit) residential applications.
- The [air source heat pump sizing and selection app](https://heatpump-tool-outil-thermopompe.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/?_gl=1*60lig9*_ga*MzM4MjkyMDU2LjE3MjcxMTU1ODY.*_ga_C2N57Y7DX5*MTcyNzI4MzA5My4xLjAuMTcyNzI4MzA5My4wLjAuMA..) is for mechanical system designers and HVAC professionals to use with builders and homeowners in both new builds and home renovations.
- Watch this video: [Using NRCans Air Source Heat Pump Sizing & Selection tool to drive heat pump sales](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mGEHGluZK0A)

## More heat pump information

- **[Heating and cooling with a heat pump](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/heating-cooling-heat-pump)**: detailed webpage. Heat pump systems are an energy efficient, proven, and reliable technology. A heat pump can provide year-round comfort control in homes by heating in the winter, cooling in the summer, and in some cases, by heating water.
- **[The future of home heating: Hybrid home heating systems offer energy savings and reduce GHG emissions](/stories/simply-science/future-home-heating-hybrid-home-heating-systems-offer-energy-savings-reduce-ghg-emissions)**: research findings. NRCan researchers measured energy use and comfort levels in several test homes that use hybrid heating, which is the combination of a natural gas furnace and an electric air source heat pump. The results were a 30% decrease in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in one complete heating season.

## Videos

- **[Best practices in heat pump retrofits](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/local-energy-efficiency-partnerships-leep/leep-videos/best-practices-heat-pumps)**:
  *This video series of case study homes across Canada showcases best practices in heat pump sizing, selection and installation. Industry professionals (such as HVAC contractors, energy advisors, builders and renovators) can apply these best practices to design and install heat pump systems in a diverse range of homes. The result is a cost-effective and comfortable solution.*
- **[An introduction to cold climate heat pumps (4:20)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g49hVAYENIM)**:
  *Modern cold climate heat pump systems can reliably heat your home, even when external temps are minus 28 to minus 29 degrees Celsius, with minimal drop-off. As we look at decarbonizing and moving away from fossil fuels, we can expect to see a lot more people turning to heat pump systems.*
- **[Oil furnace to heat pump retrofits: A whole home approach (4:24)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYkc8sgd_cw)**:
  *Learn how a homeowner in Halifax, Nova Scotia, replaced an oil furnace with a centrally ducted heat pump but avoided common pitfalls such as oversizing, unnecessary ductwork upgrades, and relying on back-up heat too much.*
- **[Oil furnace to heat pump retrofits: Utilizing existing distribution systems (5:44)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tEf4Bfdhnoo&embeds_referring_euri=https%3A%2F%2Fnatural-resources.canada.ca%2F&embeds_referring_origin=https%3A%2F%2Fnatural-resources.canada.ca&source_ve_path=MjM4NTE)**:
  *Ducted systems require more knowledge and understanding of airflow, static pressure and distribution to ensure that the homeowner is going to get the comfort that they're paying for in their home.*
- **[An envelope first approach to heat pump retrofits (4:05)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fp8KEzz64Ac)**:
  *NRCan's air source heat pump sizing and selection tool was a good link between the EnerGuide energy efficiency home evaluation and the equipment selection. It's a useful way for contractors to see the impacts of the various heat pump models and communicate the optimal size to their customers.*

## Informing homeowners

NRCan encourages industry professionals to use the following tools and resources to inform homeowners about current heat pumps, programs and funding.

- **[Electric heat pumps](/energy-efficiency/electric-heat-pumps)**: Find the facts, Heat pump basics, Find a heat pump, Heat pump retrofit videos, and additional resources.
- **[Heat pump eligibility for the Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/heat-pumps-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program)**: Find out which heat pumps are eligible for the OHPA program and what to consider before and after having a heat pump installed.
- **[Podcast: A heated conversation about heat pumps](/stories/simply-science/heated-conversation-heat-pumps)**: Scientists and engineers at NRCan believe a promising technology can help reduce energy consumption  the heat pump. What are heat pumps? How do they work? Are they right for you? Listen to find out.
- **[Heating and cooling with a heat pump](/energy-efficiency/energy-star/heating-cooling-heat-pump)**: Learn more in this in-depth booklet about heat pump technologies.

## Funding

### [Canada Greener Homes Initiative](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative)

Under the Canada Greener Homes Initiative, the following programs can help homeowners undertake energy efficiency retrofits:

- **[Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/oil-heat-pump-affordability-program)**:
  *The OHPA program helps homeowners with median income or less who are currently heating their homes with oil, make the transition to a more efficient heat pump system. A home energy evaluation is not required for this program.*
  *Homeowners in British Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and Yukon need to visit their [provincial/territorial program](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/applicants-participating-provinces-territories) website for information because details vary.*
  *Watch this video for an introduction about the OHPA program: [What is the OHPA program?](https://youtu.be/mNUo6eLlCEQ)*

- **[Canada Greener Homes Affordability Program](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/canada-greener-homes-affordability-program)**:
  *The new Canada Greener Homes Affordability Program (CGHAP) will start to be delivered in 2025 through NRCans partners in provinces and territories. CGHAP-funded programs will provide low-to-median-income homeowners and tenants with no-cost home retrofits, such as insulation and heat pumps. This will help to reduce monthly energy bills, energy use, and greenhouse gas emissions.*
  *More information on how CGHAP will operate in each jurisdiction will become available as regional programs are developed and rolled out across the country.*

### Other funding opportunities

Use the following directories to find programs of interest:

- [Financial incentives by province and territory](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/financial-incentive-province)
- [Directory of energy efficiency programs for homes](https://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/residential/programs/programs.cfm)
- [Funding, grants and incentives](/funding-partnerships/grants-incentives)

## Publications

- **[Factsheet for the Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program (PDF, 1MB)](/sites/admin/files/documents/2025-06/23-05579%20-%20OHPA%20Factsheet_EN-May27-2-2025.pdf)**: Fast facts about the OHPA program and heat pumps.
- **[Heat pump basics (brochure): Transitioning from oil heating (PDF, 1.5 MB)](/sites/nrcan/files/energy/efficiency/heat-pumps/pdf/HeatPump_Pamphlet_ENG_Final_Accessible.pdf)**: Although heat pumps are best known for heating, they also provide cooling by transferring warm indoor air to the outside. In fact, if you have an air conditioner or a refrigerator at home, you are already familiar with heat pump technology  they work in the same way.
- **[Keeping the heat in - Operating and maintaining the heating, ventilating and air-conditioning system](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/keeping-heat-section-9-operating-your-house-thermostats-water-heaters-furnaces-other-heatingcooling-systems)**: Find information about maintenance procedures for cleaning and servicing heating and cooling equipment, including heat pumps, in section 9.1 of the publication.

## Resources

**Applying**

- [Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/oil-heat-pump-affordability-program)
- [How the Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program process works](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/process-works)
- [Eligibility criteria](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligibility-criteria-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program)
- [Check if your income level is eligible](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/median-income-threshold-table-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program)
- [Check if your property type is eligible](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligible-property-types)
- [What you will need to apply](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligibility-criteria-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program#need)
- [Technical assistance for the Canada Greener Homes portal](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/technical-assistance-canada-greener-homes-initiative)

**Other financial incentives and money saving tips**

- [Financial incentives by province and territory](/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/financial-incentive-province)
- [Save money on your energy bill](https://www.canada.ca/en/campaign/save-money-on-energy.html)
- [Directory of energy efficiency programs for homes](https://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/residential/programs/programs.cfm)
- [Funding, grants and incentives](/funding-partnerships/grants-incentives)

*For information regarding reproduction rights, contact Natural Resources Canada at [copyright-droitdauteur@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:copyright-droitdauteur@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca).*