# Air Source Heat Pumps

## Program Overview

The **Energy Affordability Program** is offering **free cold climate air source heat pumps** to income-eligible households with electric or oil heating.

## Why Get a Heat Pump?

### It's 100 percent free!
If you qualify for the Energy Affordability Program, theres no costand no catch. Everything is free, from assessment to installation.

### Lower energy costs
With a heat pump, youll use less energy to heat and cool your home. That means you can count on **lower energy costs all year long**.

### More comfortable home
Heat pumps do more than just heat and cool. They also **dehumidify and filter dust and allergens** from the air. All this means more comfort for you.

## What you need to know about heat pumps

### What is a cold climate air source heat pump?
A machine that runs on **electricity**, instead of burning natural gas, oil or propane, to create heat. Heat pumps are an efficient and affordable way to heat and cool spaces year-round.

### How do they work?
-   **Summer**: Transfer hot, humid air from your home to the outdoors.
-   **Winter**: Transfer heat from the outside air into your home.

_Other types of heat pumps include water source and geothermal._

### Do they work when its cold outside?
Yes, cold climate air source heat pumps are designed to work in **below-freezing temperatures** by transferring warmth from the outside air into your home.

### Is a heat pump right for your home?
If you have **electric heating or oil heating** in your home and qualify for the Energy Affordability Program, a cold climate air source heat pump may be right for you.

### How much energy will you save?
-   **Switching from an electric furnace or electric baseboard heating**: Could save you up to **50% on the heating portion of your electricity bills**.
-   **Switching from an oil furnace**: Could save you up to **50% on your home heating costs**.

## More energy-saving upgrades available
The Energy Affordability Program offers energy-saving upgrades tailored to the specific needs of your home, all at no cost. You could qualify for:

### Upgrades for all homes
-   LED light bulbs
-   Energy-efficient refrigerators
-   Energy-efficient freezers
-   Energy-efficient dehumidifiers
-   Energy-efficient window air conditioner
-   Drying rack for clothes
-   Smart power strip

### Additional upgrades for homes with electric hot water heating
-   High-efficiency showerheads (standard and handheld)
-   Faucet aerators (kitchen and bathroom)

### Additional upgrades for electrically heated and oil-heated homes
-   Cold climate air source heat pump
-   Additional attic or basement insulation
-   Draft proofing
-   Programmable or Smart thermostat(s)

## Resources

-   **Air Source Heat Pumps Post-installation guide**
-   **Air Source Heat Pumps Maintenance Considerations for Homes guide**

_For additional resources, visit the Training and Support section._

## Questions?

Call **1-844-770-3148**.