# Displays (signage displays and monitors)

## Digital signage

An **ENERGY STAR certified digital signage display** is **4% more efficient**, on average, than standard models. Digital signage displays are intended for multiple people to view content in non-desk-based environments, such as retail or department stores, restaurants, museums, hotels, outdoor venues, airports, conference rooms or classrooms. Digital signage displays are a useful tool to promote your products, present information and show company branding.

*Image: Computer monitor on desk*

There are different types of signage displays that differ in cost, lifespan and other features. Some common features include:

- Touch screen
- Video wall compatible
- Ability to host computer/graphics cards
- PC inputs, serial ports, USB etc.
- Tougher enclosures (e.g. to withstand high heat of grease on menu boards)
- Portrait orientation

### Key features

- More efficient and cooler-running panel technologies that save energy
- Offer all the features and functionality of conventional models
- For displays that have off mode, power is less than 1 watt

## Monitors

An **ENERGY STAR certified monitor uses 7% less energy**, on average, than a standard model. Monitors that have earned the [ENERGY STAR Most Efficient](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/energy-star-most-efficient) designation are the best of the best  theyll save you more energy than standard models. There are three main types of electronic displays eligible for ENERGY STAR certification: computer monitors, digital picture frames and professional signage displays.

*Image: Computer monitor on desk*

### Key features

- Meet stringent energy efficiency requirements in \"on\", \"sleep\", and \"off\" modes
- Allow you to set your monitor to first dim and then enter a low power sleep mode when the computer is inactive
- Automatic brightness control features are set to a power-saving mode for shipment, which allows monitors to conserve power automatically when they are turned on

## Helpful tips

- Dont use screen savers. Screen savers generally do not save energy, and may actually prevent a computer from entering sleep mode.
- Enable your computer's power-reducing features to turn off the display when you are away from your computer for extended periods to reduce energy consumption.

### The ENERGY STAR Promise

*Image: Energy Star logo*

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict [efficiency specifications](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/technical-specifications) and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

Start your research [using the ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool to find and compare](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-displays/results/?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) certified displays (You will be redirected to the U.S. ENERGY STAR website).

## Related Blog Posts

- *Image: Home-Office1.jpg*
  [Manage your home office energy like a boss](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/manage-your-home-office-energy-boss)
- *Image: thumbnail_0.jpg*
  [Back to school with energy savings](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/spotlight-energy-efficiency/back-school-energy-savings)

### Connect with us

Follow us on any of our social media channels for energy-efficient tips, rebates, giveaways and much more.

*The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.*