# Energy Journey for Homeowners

## Energy Saving Tips and Information

### Trying to decide on the perfect bulb?

When shopping for an **LED bulb**, look at the bulbs **lumens per watt**. Lumens are a measure of a lightbulbs efficiency and its brightness. The higher the lumen the more efficient and brighter the bulb.

*Learn more about LED lighting with our buying guide.*

### Savings worth savouring

Even small changes add up to noticeable energy savings. By switching your bulbs to **LEDs**, you could save enough for **40 cups of coffee** in just one year.

### Humidity and home comfort go hand in hand

**What level of humidity should your home have?**

Every home is different, but a level between **30% and 40% humidity** is typically ideal for keeping your home warm and comfortable in the winter, without leaving condensation on the windows. In the summer, that level can be higher, between **50% and 60%**.

*Learn more about humidity at home.*

### Brrr. isnt something you should be saying indoors

Use **weather stripping** on windows and doors in your home to help seal cracks that let cold drafts in; because an airtight home benefits not only your energy costs but your comfort as well.

### Reduce allergies and save energy

We can help you stay allergy free this Spring and save on your energy bill. *Find out how to reduce allergies.*

### Is your gaming system costing you?

You'd be surprised to learn how much energy your console uses when it's not in use. Power down after gameplay to save energy.

*Did you know?* Most gaming systems have a **power saving mode** that can help cut down on its energy use. *Learn how to enable this feature for your console.*

### Shopping for new appliances? Buy smart and efficient.

From fridges with internal cameras for efficient snack perusing, to dryers that know when to stop tumbling dry clothes, the world of smart appliances continues to grow.

Just remember to look for the blue **ENERGY STAR** label. ENERGY STAR-certified appliances are proven to be more efficient; helping you hit the ground running with lasting energy savings.

### How to set your ceiling fan direction for each season

*Did you know?* Setting the direction of your fan blades will help you control the temperature in your home, so you can save on both cooling and heating costs. *Find out more.*

### Looking for more ways to save?

Sign up for our newsletter or follow us online for more tips and information.