# Solar Photovoltaic Energy in Buildings

Photovoltaic (PV) systems convert energy from the sun into electricity. They are a safe and reliable source of solar electricity that produces no on-site pollution or emissions. PV systems incur few operating costs and can be installed on any kind of building, including:

-   Residential
-   Commercial
-   Industrial
-   Institutional
-   Agricultural

PV systems fall into two main categories:

-   **Off-grid systems**: Typically installed in remote locations without a utility grid. These systems usually require storage, such as batteries, to store excess electricity. Energy can be withdrawn from batteries when demand exceeds PV system electricity production.
-   **Grid-connected systems**: Can also include storage technologies, but generally feed any excess electrical energy production to the grid.

In the built environment, photovoltaic systems can be split into two market segments:

1.  **Building-applied photovoltaics (BAPV)**: Where the PV system is added to an existing building (e.g., conventional rooftop applications).
2.  **Building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV)**: Where the PV system can be included as part of building components to become an integral part of the building skin.

The Government of Canada has several [testing facilities](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/building-energy-efficiency/testing-facilities) for solar PV in buildings located in Varennes, Quebec, which [set the foundation for BIPV research in Canada](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/node/3933).

For more information on the technical, economic, environmental, and social aspects of photovoltaic systems and examples of PV systems around the world, visit the [International Energy Agency Photovoltaic Power Systems Program](https://www.iea.org/topics/renewables/solar/) website. For more resources on solar PV energy in buildings, please visit their [resources page](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/science-data/science-research/resources), their [PV and solar resource maps](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/18366), and their [Q & As page](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/node/3935).

## Q & A's

### Q. Can I use PV for heating?

**A.** Even though it is technically possible, heating with PV modules is not really a viable option. This source of energy is normally used in situations where there is no other way of powering electronic equipment (radio, television), small motors, or lights. Heating is best done using wood, hydrocarbons such as propane or diesel, or other solar technologies specifically designed to collect heat.

### Q. Can I use PV modules on my house to reduce my power bill?

**A.** Connecting solar modules to the power grid is not yet an economically viable option in Canada. However, it is technically feasible, and some people choose to do so for personal or environmental reasons. If you intend to connect your PV system to the electrical grid, you will need to get authorization from your local electricity supplier and meet a number of requirements. Also, net metering is not automatically applicable and must be discussed with your supplier.

### Q. How does cold affect the performance of PV systems?

**A.** Contrary to what one might think, PV cells perform even better at low temperatures. This technology is thus perfectly suited to the Canadian climate. However, other components of a PV system, such as the batteries, may not perform as well in cold weather and may require some protection.

### Related links:

-   [Testing Facilities](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/building-energy-efficiency/testing-facilities)
-   [Resources](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/science-data/science-research/resources)