# Cooking Appliances

## Looking for an energy-efficient cooking appliance?

In Canada, cooking appliancescooktops, ovens, ranges, and microwave ovensmust meet minimum energy performance standards set by Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations*. Cooktops, ovens, and ranges (except gas ranges) must also display an EnerGuide label that indicates how much energy the model uses.

### Cooking appliance technology and energy efficiency

Today's cooktops, ovens, and ranges are about as energy efficient as current technology allows. After adding better oven insulation and tighter-fitting oven doors, there are few ways left to increase the energy efficiency of these appliances.

Since the range of energy consumption between different models is small, there is no ENERGY STAR specification to qualify cooking appliances as high efficiency.

For more information, check out our [Buying and operating tips](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/buying-operating-tips-cooking-appliances) page.

### Use EnerGuide to compare energy efficiency

*EnerGuide label for cooking appliances*

The **EnerGuide label** is mandatory for all cooking appliances in Canada except gas ranges. It must be easy to see on the outside or inside of the product.

The label shows the **product type**, **model number**, and **average energy consumption in kilowatt hours (kWh) per year**. A scale shows how the models energy use compares with similar models: the lower the number, the more efficient the product.

Learn more about [EnerGuide](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide).

### Check the \"second price tag\"

The first price tag is the sticker price. The second price tag is the appliance's annual or lifetime operating cost. Use NRCans [calculator for new appliances](http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/residential/personal/appliances/energy-cost-calculator.cfm?attr=4) to see the cost of operating a range for one year.

- Compare current models of all microwaves, cooktops, ovens, and ranges available in Canada in our [searchable product list](http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/pml-lmp/index.cfm?action=app.welcome-bienvenue).

### Regulations set the energy efficiency minimum

All residential cooking appliances are subject to Canadas *Energy Efficiency Regulations*, which set a performance standard for their energy consumption. This helps keep the least efficient products off the Canadian market.

- View the performance standards for [microwave ovens](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/microwave-ovens), residential [gas](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/gas-ranges) or [electric](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/electric-ranges) ranges in Canada.
- Learn more about how Canadas [*Energy Efficiency Regulations*](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/guide-canada-s-energy-efficiency-regulations) work.

[Detailed information for manufacturers](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/node/12513)

[Additional information for retailers](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/node/12515)

**Types of cooktops**

There are three general types of cooktops: gas, electric, and induction.

-   **Gas cooktops**: Heat food with flame, generally the least efficient as much heat is lost to the air.
-   **Electric cooktops**: More efficient than gas, as more heat is transferred directly to the cooking surface. Includes open coil-type and smooth cooking tops.
-   **Induction cooktops**: Use electricity to generate heat through electromagnets, heating cookware directly. Considered one of the most efficient, offering improved safety, speed, temperature control, and ease of cleaning. Requires special types of cookware.

**Types of ovens**

Ovens typically fall into three main categories: electric, gas, or microwave.

-   **Electric ovens**: Easy to use and clean, good for even cooking. Available in:
    -   **Conventional (conduction) ovens**: Heat air around food.
    -   **Convection ovens**: Use fans to circulate air, cooking food faster and at lower temperatures, thus saving energy and money.
-   **Gas ovens**: Often provide quick heating and better moisture retention but may have hotspots and uneven heat. Use a less clean fuel source than electric types.
-   **Microwave ovens**: Electric ovens that heat or cook food using microwave energy. Very quick and energy efficient.