# Sterling and Colin

## Have fun and save energy at the same time!

Being energy efficient is actually a lot more fun than you might think! There are lots of simple yet entertaining activities you can enjoy that can lead to long-term savings. From arts and crafts, to hosting a board game night, to a yummy no-bake recipe cook-off, consider changing it up from time to time and get the whole family in on the fun (pets included )

**Go Further:** Unplugging from electronics such as phones, devices and TVs is not only good for your energy bills, its also good for your health. Spending quality time outdoors exploring nature and your community is always a win-win (not to mention getting in your steps!)

## Making small changes to your routines can also help you save on energy

Take your laundry for example. There are simple ways to reduce your energy use when washing and drying your clothes, towels and bedding (including your furry ones bed). Start by doing your laundry in the evening or overnight during **off-peak hours** when electricity costs are at their lowest.

Did you know that **dryers can account for 6 percent of a homes total energy use**? So, rather than using the dryer for all your laundry, try hanging your clothes to dry on a rack or a drying line. There are great options available for indoor use when the weather gets colder.

**Go Further:** Washing in cold water can help you reduce the amount of energy you use for heating water. Try using the cold water settings on your washing machine. If warm or hot water are needed for a load, you could set your cycle to wash in warm or hot water and rinse in cold.

## Ways to zap energy-sucking phantom power from your home

Did you know your electronic devices consume energy even when theyre not being used if you leave them plugged in?

This is called phantom power and it refers to the energy consumed by the electronic devices in your home when theyre plugged in but are not actively being used. Consider all the devices in your home: laptops, gaming consoles, TVs, phones and tablets  the list goes on. In fact, **75 percent of the electricity used by your devices happens when theyre not even on**. Phantom power can **increase your home's average energy costs by up to 10 percent**.

So, keep an eye on your electronics to make sure theyre not drawing phantom power. The easiest way to do this is by unplugging your devices when youre not using them. You can also purchase an electricity usage monitor device, which allows you to plug in various tech or appliances and check how much power they use.

**Go Further:** Consider investing in smart or programmable power bars with built-in timers or shut-off capabilities, motion sensors and infrared (IR) sensors, that automatically cut power to devices that are inactive.