# Home Energy Retrofits 101

A home energy retrofit is a way to improve how your home uses energy by upgrading light fixtures, sealing windows/doors, adding solar panels, etc.

Twenty-five per cent of Ontarios GHG emissions currently come from heating and cooling buildings, and our population is growing. Every step you take to reduce your energy use is a step toward a more sustainable future. Before starting any home renovation project, check with your home insurance provider to ensure it will not change your coverage.

## Benefits of Home Retrofits

-   Lower your energy bills
-   Reduce GHG emissions
-   Protect against potential energy price increases
-   Improve occupant comfort

## Oakville Homes' Energy Impact

-   **33 per cent** of Oakvilles energy use
-   **27 per cent** of Oakvilles GHG emissions

## EnerGuide Home Evaluations

EnerGuide home evaluations or home energy audits can help you understand how your home uses energy and identify potential retrofits that would be best for your home.

-   Audits are carried out by a **registered energy advisor**.
-   Audits will provide an **EnerGuide rating** for your home and an energy efficiency report to help with decisions.
-   Typically cost between **$400 to $600**.
-   Homeowners pay up-front for evaluations, but may be eligible for grants or rebates to cover costs through programs like **Enbridge Gas** or **Natural Resources Canada**.

## Rebates and Incentives

*Rebates and incentives can be combined. Review details for eligibility.*

### Federal Government

-   **Canada Greener Homes Initiative**
    -   Grants up to **$5,000**
    -   Interest-free loans up to **$40,000**

### Enbridge

-   **Home Efficiency Rebate Plus Program**
    -   Rebates up to **$10,000**
-   **Clean Home Heating Initiative**
    -   Rebates up to **$4,500** for an electric air-source heat pump
-   **Home Winterproofing Program**
    -   *Free insulation, draft proofing, and a smart thermostat* for income-qualified homes to reduce heating and cooling costs.

### Save on Energy (Partnered with Enbridge Gas and Ontario government)

#### Home Renovation Savings Program  No energy assessment required upgrades

*Do one or more upgrades and receive rebates that do not require a home energy assessment.*

-   **Heat pumps**: Up to **$12,000**
-   **Solar panels and battery storage**: Up to **$10,000**
-   **Smart thermostats**: **$75**

#### Home Renovation Savings Program  Energy assessment required upgrades

*Start with an initial home energy assessment, then complete at least two energy-saving upgrades to qualify for rebates.*

-   **Home energy assessments**: **$600** (rebate after successful program completion to offset initial and follow-up assessment costs).
-   **Heat pump water heaters**: **$500**
-   **Windows and doors**: **$100** per rough opening
-   **Air sealing**: Up to **$250**
-   **Attic insulation**: Up to **$1,500**
-   **Foundation insulation**: Up to **$3,500**
-   **Exposed floor insulation**: **$300**
-   **Exterior wall insulation**: Up to **$3,600**

## Finding Qualified Contractors

-   Simple upgrades can be done with research and guidance.
-   Bigger upgrades (furnace, water heater, boiler) should be completed by a **licensed HVAC contractor**.
-   Always ask for **credentials** and check **reviews** when choosing a contractor.
-   Find a **Registered Energy Advisor** through Natural Resources Canada's database.

## Examples of Common Deep Retrofits

*This is not an exhaustive list.*

### Heat Pumps

*Move heat from one space to another. Provides heating in winter by transferring heat inside and cooling in summer by sending heat outside.*

#### Benefits

-   Increase home value
-   Utility bill savings
-   Require less maintenance than combustion heating systems
-   Provide both heating and cooling

### Building Envelope Improvements

*Slow the flow of air into or out of your home.*

#### Benefits

-   **Insulation** slows the rate of heat loss.
-   **Air sealing** prevents air leakage from windows and doors.
-   Fewer drafts during the winter
-   Utility bill savings
-   Less outdoor noise pollution
-   Improves air quality

### Solar PV and Battery Storage

*Converts energy from the sun into electricity.*

#### Benefits

-   Source of renewable energy; reduces GHG emissions
-   Utility bill savings
-   Increases home value
-   Solar generated can be stored by battery (for power outages)
-   Excess power can be sent into grid (on-bill credits with Net-Metering)

## Public Engagement Opportunities

The questionnaire for feedback on future Town programs and resources for home energy upgrades is now closed. Feedback will be used to develop education programs and support resources for residents.

## Heat Pump Education Program

Thanks to a **$25,000 grant from Natural Resources Canada**, the Town of Oakville launched a Heat Pump Education Program with the Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Institute of Canada (HRAI) for industry professionals and homeowners in 2024 and 2025. Heat pumps help lower heating and cooling costs, reduce carbon emissions, and provide environmentally-friendly heating and cooling.