# What is an energy-efficient home?

Any home, no matter when it was built, can be energy-efficient. Modern construction standards demand greater energy efficiency in new homes, but older homes can be upgraded to improve their energy performance. And the people living in these homes can be energy-efficient in their habits, too.

## An energy-efficient home is

_\"A house that uses energy efficiently is a happy home.\"_

**Key Energy Efficiency Features:**
-   **Airtight construction** (outside walls)
-   **High-performing ENERGY STAR certified windows**
-   **Air sealing** (e.g., around windows, doors, electrical outlets, vents)
-   **LED or ENERGY STAR certified lighting**
-   **ENERGY STAR certified appliances** (e.g., fridge, clothes washer and dryer)
-   **High-performing or ENERGY STAR equipment** (e.g., furnace, AC, water heater)
-   **Better insulation** (e.g., walls, attic, basement)

### Cost-effective

An energy-efficient home has a great **EnerGuide rating**. This means its **well insulated** and **airtight**, with **high-efficiency heating and cooling equipment** that helps keep utility bills low. Its outfitted with **low-flow accessories** to lower water consumption and water-heating costs. The people living in this home keep inside temperatures reasonable, use electricity wisely and buy **ENERGY STAR certified products and appliances**.

### Comfortable and healthy

Its **warm in winter**, **cool in summer** and **free of drafts**. The home has great **ventilation** and excellent **air quality**; its never too humid or dry. The people living there use a **programmable thermostat** to manage heating and cooling at night and when theyre away.

### Always adding value

This homes fixtures and upgrades show a commitment to energy efficiency that adds **resale value**. Newer windows and doors, and high-efficiency lighting and appliances not only save money and energy, they also look great to buyers. And investments in **renewable energy** like solar panels can pay off for years to come.

### Kind to the environment

All the efficient features and elements work together to lower **energy consumption**, reduce **greenhouse gas emissions** and shrink the homes **carbon footprint**.

## Recommendations & Further Actions

*   Learn how you can [make your home more energy-efficient](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/make-your-home-more-energy-efficient).
*   Take charge of your homes energy performance with an [EnerGuide energy efficiency home evaluation](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/energuide-energy-efficiency-home-evaluations).
*   [Find available incentives in your area](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/financial-incentive-province).
*   [Buy an energy-efficient new home](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/buying-energy-efficient-new-home).

**Date modified:** _2025-01-16_