# Pool Pumps - Energy Efficiency Regulations

## Regulatory Definition

**Pool pump** means a pump designed for use with a pool or spa that is one of the following:

*   A filter pump with a hydraulic power of less than **1.865 kW (2.5 HP)**.
*   A pressure cleaner booster pump.
*   A waterfall pump with a maximum head less than or equal to **9.144 m (30 ft)** and a maximum speed less than or equal to **1800 RPM**.
*   A pump with an integral sand filter.
*   A pump with an integral cartridge filter.
*   A pump for a storable electric spa.
*   A pump for a rigid electric spa.

It does **not** include:

*   Clean water pump.
*   A circulator pump.
*   A submersible pump.
*   A pool filter pump with hydraulic output power equal to or greater than **1.865 kW (2.5 HP)**.
*   A pump marketed exclusively for commercial use that has:
    *   An orifice on the pump body that accepts suction side plumbing connections with an inner diameter greater than **72 mm (2.85 inches)**, AND
    *   A measured performance greater than or equal to **757 litres per minute (200 US gallons per minute)** at **15.24 m (50 feet)** of head.

## Compliance Information

*   **Compliance Date**: Manufactured on or after **January 1, 2026**.
*   **Compliant Product Models**: Listed on NRCans searchable database [Pool pumps](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US?_gl=1*yh23u0*_ga*MTY3MzA4MTU4NS4xNzQxMjc2OTEy*_ga_C2N57Y7DX5*czE3NTU2ODkwNjUkbzIxJGcwJHQxNzU1Njg5MDY1JGo2MCRsMCRoMA..)
*   **Testing Standard**: **10 C.F.R. Appendix C**
*   **Energy Efficiency Regulations by Province**: Find out which provinces have their own regulations [here](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/energy-efficiency-regulations-province).

## Energy Efficiency Standards

*   **Performance Standards**: **10 CFR 431.465(f)** for single-phase self-priming pool filter pumps, non-self-priming pool filter pumps, and pressure cleaner booster pumps.
*   **Prescriptive Standards**:
    *   **10 CFR 431.465(g)** for integral sand filter pool pumps and integral cartridge filter pool pumps sold with a pool pump timer.
    *   **10 CFR 431.465(h)** for all pool pumps that include freeze-protection.

### Detailed Energy Efficiency Standards

| Item | Energy-using Product | Testing Standard | Energy Efficiency Standard |
| :--- | :------------------- | :--------------- | :------------------------- |
| 1    | Self-priming pool filter pumps that have a single phase electric motor and hydraulic horsepower of 0.711 HP or more but less than 2.5 HP | 10 C.F.R. Appendix C | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(f)<br>10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |
| 2    | Self-priming pool filter pumps that have a single phase electric motor and hydraulic horsepower of less than 0.711 HP | 10 C.F.R. Appendix C | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(f)<br>10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |
| 3    | Non-self-priming pool filter pumps that have hydraulic horsepower of less than 2.5 HP | 10 C.F.R. Appendix C | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(f)<br>10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |
| 4    | Pressure cleaner booster pumps | 10 C.F.R. Appendix C | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(f)<br>10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |
| 5    | Waterfall pumps | 10 C.F.R. Appendix C | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |
| 6    | Integral sand filter pool pumps | None | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(g)<br>10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |
| 7    | Integral cartridge filter pool pumps | None | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(g)<br>10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |
| 8    | Storable electric spa pumps | None | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |
| 9    | Rigid electric spa pumps | None | 10 C.F.R. 431.465(h) |

### Specific Prescriptive Standards

*   **10 CFR 431.465(g)**: Each integral cartridge filter pool pump and integral sand filter pool pump must be sold with a pool pump timer that is either integral to the pump or a separate component shipped with the pump.
*   **10 CFR 431.465(h)**: For all pool pumps with freeze protection controls, the pump must be shipped with freeze protection disabled or with the following default, user-adjustable settings:
    1.  The default dry-bulb air temperature setting is no greater than **4.4 C (40 F)**.
    2.  The default run time setting must be no greater than **1 hour** (before the temperature is rechecked).
    3.  The default motor speed must not be more than **12 of the maximum available speed**.

## Energy Efficiency Report Requirements

The energy efficiency report for pool pumps must include the following information:

*   **Name of product**
*   **Brand name**
*   **Model number**
*   **Name of manufacturer**
*   **Name of the certification body** or province whose verification mark will be on the product or its package
*   Whether a **mathematical model** (as defined in the Regulations) was used to generate any of the information provided below.
*   Its **type**.
*   Its **nominal motor power**, expressed in watts.
*   Its **nominal hydraulic power**, expressed in watts.
*   Its **total power**, expressed in watts.
*   In the case of a self-priming pool filter pump, a non-self-priming pool filter pump, a waterfall pump or a pressure cleaner booster pump, its **weighted energy factor**.
*   In the case of a pool pump with an integral filter, information indicating whether it has a **separate or built-in timer**.
*   Information indicating whether it has **freeze protection controls**.
*   In the case of a pool pump with freeze protection controls, information indicating whether **freeze protection is enabled or disabled**.
*   In the case of a pool pump with freeze protection controls that are enabled, its **default dry-bulb air temperature setting, default run-time and default motor speed**.

To download and submit an energy efficiency report for this product, sign in to the [Compliance Regulatory Energy Efficiency Database (CREED)](https://energy-reporting-rapports-energetiques.canada.ca/creed/s/).

*Note: This document is an administrative document intended to facilitate compliance with the Energy Efficiency Act and its associated regulations. It is not intended to provide legal advice.*