# EnerGuide Rating System for Builders

## A respected mark of energy performance
Natural Resources Canadas (NRCan) [EnerGuide Rating System](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/energuide-rated-new-homes) helps **homebuilders** evaluate their house plans for **energy performance** and provide customers with **energy-efficiency upgrades**.

Finished homes receive an **EnerGuide label**, which is recognized across Canada. This label adds value for customers by helping them understand their home's energy performance.

NRCans **ENERGY STAR for New Homes** and **R-2000** initiatives utilize the EnerGuide Rating System to measure a home's energy efficiency.

## Become a registered builder
Follow these simple steps to become an EnerGuide registered builder:

1.  **Contact a service organization** in your area.
2.  Discuss registration requirements.
3.  Register with NRCan by email and sign the Terms and Conditions for using the EnerGuide Rating System.

## How to get your homes rated with EnerGuide
1.  An **energy advisor** will collaborate with a **service organization** to evaluate your house plans. They use energy simulation software to estimate future energy consumption.
2.  Following the evaluation, the energy advisor will assist you in developing **cost-effective energy efficiency upgrades** to offer customers.
3.  Once the home is built, the energy advisor performs an on-site visit to verify the incorporation of energy upgrades and conduct a **blower door test**.
4.  After this final evaluation, you will receive an **EnerGuide label** for the house and a report for the homeowner.

## The benefits of being an EnerGuide registered builder
*   **Government backed**: Add value to your business with a nationally recognized label for energy efficiency.
*   **Customer satisfaction**: Provide valuable information about home energy performance, helping homeowners use less energy and save on utility bills.
*   **Savings**: EnerGuide rating helps you choose the most realistic and cost-effective energy improvements for your house plans.
*   **Maximum flexibility**: Include energy-efficiency upgrades as a standard package or offer them as additional options to homebuyers.
*   **Ongoing support and learning opportunities**: Access NRCans tools and standards to integrate energy efficiency into new home designs.

**Date modified**: *2025-01-16*