# Heat pumps for the Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program

Join the growing number of Canadian homeowners who have switched from oil heating to electric heat pumps to save money on their energy bills and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Heat pumps can provide heating and cooling in your home. Retrofitting your home heating system can be a worthwhile investment to improve your comfort throughout each season.

Review the types of heat pumps eligible for funding and learn about important factors when it comes to choosing, sizing and installing, operating, and maintaining a heat pump.

## Where do I start?

### Review the types of heat pumps eligible for funding

The **Oil to Heat Pump Affordability (OHPA) program** provides funding to eligible homeowners, currently heating their homes with oil, to help them transition to an electric heat pump system.

The following heat pumps are eligible for funding under the OHPA program:

#### Air source heat pumps

Air-source heat pumps are the most common type of heat pump available in Canada. Air-source heat pumps work by drawing heat from the outside air to keep your home warm during cold months and by expelling heat to the outside to help keep your home cool during warm months.

Supplemental heating (for example: electric furnace, baseboard heater, boiler, etc.) may be required when outdoor temperatures are between **10C to 15C**.

Proper selection, **sizing and installation** of these systems is critical to maximize energy savings. Undersizing or oversizing can result in more costly and less efficient systems.

These systems are up to **2.5 times more efficient than an oil furnace or boiler** and are a proven and reliable way to significantly reduce your energy use.

#### Cold climate air source heat pumps

Cold climate heat pumps are air source heat pumps that are adapted to the harsh Canadian climate. They can operate when outdoor air temperatures are as cold as **-30C**, making them more efficient at heating at a wider range of temperatures than conventional air source heat pumps. If outdoor temperatures become colder than 30C, supplemental heating may be required (for example: electric furnace, baseboard heater, boiler, etc.). In addition to heating, these systems can help cool your home during warmer months.

Proper selection, **sizing and installation** of these systems is critical to maximize energy savings. Undersizing or oversizing can result in more costly and less efficient systems.

Cold climate systems can help your home achieve even greater energy savings by reaching **efficiencies up to 3 times higher than an oil furnace or boiler**.

#### Ground source heat pumps

A ground-source heat pump uses the earth, ground water, or both as the source of heat during cold months, and as a reservoir to expel heat from the home during warm months. These heat pumps are less common than air-source units but are becoming more widely used across Canada.

These systems can operate more efficiently than air-source systems, achieving **efficiencies up to 3.5 times higher than an oil furnace or boiler**.

The design and installation of a ground source heat pump must be completed according to the **CSA C448 standard** to ensure it meets specific safety, reliability, and efficiency criteria.

### Ensure your selected heat pump is eligible for funding

Consult with your mechanical contractor to ensure that the recommended heat pump is eligible for funding from the **Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program**. Confirm that the heat pump can be found in one of the [eligible products searchable lists](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligibility-criteria-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program#eligibleList) and meets the mandatory conditions for this program.

## How do I select the right type of heat pump for a grant?

### Consult a professional contractor

If youre ready to make the switch from oil heating to an electric heat pump for improved home comfort and energy bill savings, its important to start a discussion with a mechanical system contractor. Contractors can determine the heating and cooling requirements of your home. They can help you select and install the right system for your home and help maintain your equipment to ensure efficient and reliable operation. They can also explain the financial aspects of purchasing and operating a heat pump and are able to provide an estimate of the potential savings you can achieve in your area, as savings may vary by region.

### Sizing and installation

Consult a local heating and cooling professional to size, install, and maintain your equipment to ensure efficient and reliable operations.

Heat pumps vary in size and configuration. The heat pump must be sized accurately and capable of distributing heat to your **entire home** to be eligible for OHPA funding. Heat pumps must be installed by a qualified contractor.

A mechanical system contractor can help design a system that optimizes the energy savings for a house and increases the comfort of occupants. Based on the **house-as-a-system** principle, the design should account for the anticipated heat requirements including other planned energy efficiency upgrades to the building envelope (such as the installation of insulation or the replacement of windows or air sealing) to avoid oversizing the unit.

## Use these questions to help guide the discussion with your contractor:

- Is this heat pumps **Air-Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI) number** on one of the [lists of products eligible](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligibility-criteria-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program#eligibleList) for funding from the OHPA program?
- What is the model and the AHRI number of the heating and/or cooling system you are recommending?
    - *Use the model and the AHRI number provided by the mechanical system contractor to verify that the brand name and model numbers of the indoor and outdoor units are on one of the [Eligible product lists](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligibility-criteria-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program#eligibleList).*
- Does the recommended heat pump system meet the [mandatory requirements](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/eligibility-criteria-oil-heat-pump-affordability-program) for the OHPA program?
- How will you ensure the heat pump system is properly sized and capable of distributing heat throughout the entire house?
    - *NRCans [Toolkit for air source heat pump sizing and selection](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/toolkit-air-source-heat-pump-sizing-selection) is available for contractors.*
- Will you agree to sign the mandatory [attestation form](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/sites/nrcan/files/energy/pdf/AttestationForm-Oil2HeatPump_e.pdf) after the heat pump system has been installed?
- Where will the indoor and outdoor heat pump units be installed?
- Is the heat pump system quiet? What is the sound level rating?
- What is the warranty on the equipment? Is there a warranty certificate?

## What do I need to know after my new heat pump is installed?

### Care and maintenance

Proper operation of your electric heat pump will save energy and money. Some important considerations to ensure the best performance from your heat pump are:

- Optimize your heat pump settings for peak performance
- Adjust the airflow direction to maximize your comfort
- Optimize fan speed

Like all heating and cooling systems, proper and regular maintenance is key to efficient operation. It is recommended to have a contractor perform annual maintenance on your heat pump to ensure everything is in good working order. A few other things you can do to ensure reliable and efficient operation are:

- Change or clean your air filter every **3 months**
- Ensure airflow is not blocked for system effectiveness
- Consider fixing any issues with air leakage or poor insulation in the home to fully maximize the benefits of your heat pump

These considerations vary depending on your heat pump model. Be sure to follow the manufacturers instructions.

Discover more useful information that will help you get the most out of your investment:

**Air-source heat pumps:**

- [Operation Considerations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/heating-cooling-heat-pump#k)
- [Maintenance Considerations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/heating-cooling-heat-pump#l) (clean filter, contractor visits)

**Ground-source heat pumps:**

- [Operation Considerations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/heating-cooling-heat-pump#v)
- [Maintenance Considerations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/heating-cooling-heat-pump#w) (clean filter, contractor visits)

## More resources on heat pumps

- [Podcast: A heated conversation on heat pumps](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/stories/simply-science/heated-conversation-heat-pumps) - *What are heat pumps? How do they work? Why is everyone talking about them? Are they right for you? Listen to find out.*
- [Heat pumps](https://admin.natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/heat-pumps/25587)  *Find the facts and watch the videos*
- [Heating and cooling with a heat pump](https://admin.natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada/about/energy-star-announcements/publications/heating-and-cooling-heat-pump/6817)  *Learn more in this in-depth booklet about heat pump technologies*

[Back to the Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/home-energy-efficiency/canada-greener-homes-initiative/oil-heat-pump-affordability-program)

### Contact Us

**Business hours**
Monday to Friday: 8:00 am to 8:00 pm (Eastern time)

**Oil to Heat Pump Affordability program inquiries:**
- Phone: 1-833-674-8282
- TTY: 1-800-465-7735
- Email: [OHPA-CAMT@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:OHPA-CAMT@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca)

**Canada Greener Homes Loan inquiries**
- Phone: 1-866-292-9517
- Email: [Questions@cghli.ca](mailto:Questions@cghli.ca)

**Accessibility**
The Canada Greener Homes Initiative is committed to providing a barrier-free application process. We encourage you to advise us of any accommodations you may need. Please contact us either by email, toll-free number or TTY and we will happily assist you.
