# Buying and Operating Tips  Battery Chargers

## Buying Tips

*   **Efficiency has little impact on charger prices.**
    *   *Capacity (in Ampere-hours), whether it is one-phase or three-phase device, and optional features lead to great variations in price.* 
*   **Know the type you need.**
    *   Each of the three types of battery chargers**magnetic-amplifier**, **ferroresonance** and **SCR-bridge**has benefits and drawbacks. Study your needs carefully to make an informed choice.
*   **Price is only one part of the equation.**
    *   Do not buy based on price alone. Over the long run, a **higher efficiency rating should yield significant energy savings.**
*   **Match the charger to the battery.**
    *   Mismatched batteries and chargers can lead to chronic over- or undercharging and shorten battery life.
*   **Amperage matters.**
    *   Choose a charger whose charging current (in Amperes) is between **15 and 25 percent of the capacity of the battery** (in Ampere-hours, AH).
*   **How many stages do you need?**
    *   **One-stage chargers**: least expensive and charge slowly. *Monitor carefully, however: they can cause premature battery failure.*
    *   **Two-stage chargers**: provide a constant current until the battery reaches capacity. The unit then drops current to a level required only to maintain battery voltage. *These units are ideally suited to recharging batteries under load.*
    *   **Three-stage chargers**: similar to a two-stage charger, but allows a slight overvoltage while the charging current drops off to enable a quicker recharge. *Three-stage chargers should be used only in batteries that are not under loads.*
*   **Smooth out any ripples.**
    *   **High ripple can overheat a battery and shorten its life.**
    *   Three-stage chargers typically exhibit lower ripple than one-stage models, but are more expensive to buy.
*   **Keep ergonomics in mind.**
    *   Consider if the charger is too heavy, easily connected/disconnected, protects against reversed connections, prevents overcharging, and retains power when AC input is shut off. *Such considerations can help to prolong a chargers life.*

## Operating Tips

*   **Follow these best practices for even more energy savings.**
    *   Properly operated and maintained, a battery charger can last between **7 to 30 years**.
*   **Location, location, location.**
    *   Situate chargers in places where they can easily be connected.
*   **Follow the manufacturers recommendations.**
    *   For best results, observe the manufacturers inspection, maintenance and safety recommendations for chargers as well as batteries.
*   **Insist on trained personnel only.**
    *   Ensure personnel are trained on the use of industrial battery chargers and allow only authorized personnel to operate these units.