# Self-contained commercial fridges and freezers

*Energy Star Logo Present*

## Buy ENERGY STAR to save you money!

An **ENERGY STAR certified commercial fridge or freezer uses 20% less energy**, on average, than a standard model. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

### Key features

- Include components such as an ECM evaporator and condenser fan motors, hot gas anti-sweat heaters, or high-efficiency compressors, which reduce energy consumption and utility bills.

Start your research [using the ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool to find and compare](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-commercial-refrigerators-and-freezers/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) certified commercial fridges and freezers. _(NOTE: you will be redirected to the US ENERGY STAR website.)_

### Helpful tips

- Keep refrigerators and freezers full but do not overload refrigerators. A lack of airflow can increase cooling times and lead to food deterioration.
- Keep the condenser and fan clear and free of dust and debris, and defrost the unit at least once per year.
- Locate refrigerated appliances away from direct sunlight or other sources of warmth (i.e. ovens, fryers, stoves, etc.).
- Keep the door closed as much as possible, and ensure the door seals properly. Repair or replace gaskets that are not functioning properly.
- For more information on energy and cost savings see the publication [ENERGY STAR Guide for Commercial Kitchens](http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/nrcan/files/energy/pdf/energystar/Commercial-Kitchen-Guide_E_acc.pdf) [PDF - 2.1 MB].

### Types

Commercial self-contained refrigerators and freezers can be divided into types according to various key characteristics: cabinet type, door type and orientation (air-curtain or door angle).

**Cabinet type**

- reach-in cabinets with one or multiple doors
- under-counter cabinets
- roll-in/roll-through cabinets designed to admit wheeled carts on one or more sides
- pass-through cabinets with doors on opposite sides

**Door type**

- transparent doors
- solid doors
- no doors

**Orientation (air-curtain or door angle)**

- horizontal
- semi-vertical
- vertical

### The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict efficiency specifications and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

### Regulations set the energy efficiency minimum

Commercial fridges and freezers are subject to Canada's *Energy Efficiency Regulations*, which set a minimum performance standard for their energy efficiency. Find details in the [Guide to the Regulations](http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/regulations-codes-standards/6861).

The ENERGY STAR name and symbol are trademarks registered in Canada by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are administered and promoted by Natural Resources Canada.