# Air Cleaners

**May 2024**

## Technical bulletin on developing the standards

**Webinar**  Wednesday, May 29, 1:00-2:00 pm EDT

In April 2024, the Office of Energy Efficiency at Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) updated its [Forward Regulatory Plan](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/node/21709#msdynttrid=gPrvBKD4QnHLNydHNDucp-nQokQOZTaBRjIp6V7eiWk) which identifies its intention to amend Canadas _Energy Efficiency Regulations_ (the Regulations) to introduce air cleaners as a new energy-using product, including energy efficiency and testing standards to harmonize with the United States.

This technical bulletin has been released to initiate the consultation process and to collect stakeholder views on the requirements being considered for air cleaners.

Input received during this stage of the process will inform the development of the Amendment 19. In addition, NRCan will undertake a cost-benefit analysis using the best-available Canadian market data to assess the economic and environmental impacts of these new standards and to ensure Canadian consumers and businesses benefit from their implementation.

The Government of Canada intends to pre-publish a regulatory proposal in the _Canada Gazette_, Part I, in 2025.

## Background

Air cleaners are not currently defined as an energy-using product in the Regulations.

Air cleaners are responsible for significant energy use in Canada according to an internal analysis. Indeed, consumer ownership of air cleaners has grown significantly since the COVID-19 pandemic began in 2020, with shipments increasing by 80% from 2019 to 2020. Air quality concerns from wildfires and allergens have also contributed to air cleaner market growth.

Energy efficiency standards for air cleaners would save energy and reduce energy costs for Canadians. Efficiency standards could also reduce energy-related greenhouse gas emissions and help encourage manufacturers to adopt more efficient product designs.

In 2021, NRCan and the United States Department of Energy (U.S. DOE) signed the [Memorandum of Understanding Between the Department of Natural Resources of Canada and the Department of Energy of the United States of America Concerning Cooperation on Energy](https://nrcan.canada.ca/energy/resources/international-energy-cooperation/memorandum-understanding/23749), which acknowledges that both countries will collaborate on new and updated energy efficiency and testing standards where feasible and appropriate.

On April 6, 2023, the U.S. DOE published a [direct final rule](https://www.regulations.gov/document/EERE-2021-BT-TP-0036-0036) to establish new energy efficiency standards for air cleaners.

The U.S. testing standard is set out in [Appendix FF](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/part-430/appendix-Appendix FF to Subpart B of Part 430) to Subpart B of Part 430, Title 10 of the U.S. _Code of Federal Regulations_, entitled _Uniform Test Method for Measuring the Energy Consumption of Air Cleaners_. It includes methods to (1) measure the performance of the covered product, and (2) use the measured results to calculate an integrated energy factor to represent the energy efficiency of an air cleaner.

The U.S. DOE direct final rule established two tiers of standards for conventional room air cleaners, with Tier 1 standards effective as of December 31, 2023, and more stringent Tier 2 standards becoming effective on December 31, 2025.

NRCan is considering amending the Regulations to harmonize with the U.S. Tier 2 energy efficiency standards for products manufactured on or after **December 31, 2025**.

## Product description

**Air cleaner** means an electrically-powered, self-contained, mechanically encased assembly that improves indoor air quality by removing, destroying or deactivating particulates, VOC (volatile organic compounds), and/or microorganisms from the air.

It does not include a central air conditioner, room air conditioner, portable air conditioner, dehumidifier, furnace, or product that operates solely by means of ultraviolet light without a fan for air circulation.

This definition is harmonized with section 430.2 to Subpart A of Part 430 of Title 10 to the U.S. _Code of Federal Regulations_ ([10 CFR 430.2 Air cleaner](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/part-430/section-430.2#p-430.2(Air%20cleaner))). 

### Testing standard

The testing standard under consideration is:

- [Appendix FF](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/part-430/appendix-Appendix FF to Subpart B of Part 430) to Subpart B of Part 430, Title 10 of the U.S. _Code of Federal Regulations_, entitled _Uniform Test Method for Measuring the Energy Consumption of Air Cleaners_.

NRCan intends to reproduce this testing standard in an NRCan Technical Standards Document (TSD) that would be referenced by the Regulations, as amended from time to time.

### Energy efficiency standard

The energy efficiency standards under consideration for air cleaners are summarized in the table below, with the intent of harmonizing with the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations.

The energy efficiency standards would be included in an NRCan Technical Standards Document that would be referenced by the Regulations, as amended from time to time.

| Product class (CADR [cfm]) | Product class (CADR [m /h]) | Integrated Energy Factor (PM. CADR/W [cfm/W]) | Integrated Energy Factor (PM. CADR/W [m/Wh]) |
| :------------------------- | :--------------------------- | :--------------------------------------------- | :--------------------------------------------- |
| 10  PM. CADR < 100     | 17  PM. CADR < 170       | ** 1.9**                                      | ** 3.22**                                     |
| 100  PM. CADR < 150    | 170  PM. CADR < 255      | ** 2.4**                                      | ** 4.07**                                     |
| PM. CADR  150          | PM. CADR  255            | ** 2.9**                                      | ** 4.92**                                     |
| <td colspan=\"4\">
    <p>**Notes:**</p>
    <p>Clean Air Delivery Rate (CADR) means the measure of the delivery of contaminant free air, within a defined particle size range, by an air cleaner, expressed in cubic feet per minute (cfm) or cubic metres per hour (m/h).</p>
    <p>CADR is the rate of contaminant reduction in the test chamber when the air cleaner is turned on, minus the rate of natural decay when the air cleaner is not running, multiplied by the volume of the test chamber as measured in cubic feet.</p>
    <p>PM. means particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter less than or equal to a nominal 2.5 micrometers (m) as measured by a reference method.</p>
|</td> |

_Energy efficiency standards table description_

The table describes the energy efficiency standards under consideration for air cleaners. The first column has the heading product class. Product classes are defined by the Clean Air Delivery Rate in cubic feet per minute or in cubic metres per hour.

The Clean Air delivery Rate is the contaminant reduction in the test chamber when the air cleaner is turned on, minus the rate of natural decay when the air cleaner is not running, multiplied by the volume of the test chamber.

The second column specifies the Integrated Energy Factor  the energy efficiency standard  that each product class must meet. The Integrated Energy Factor is determined for particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter less than or equal to a nominal 2.5 micrometers as measured by a reference method, and has units of Clean Air Delivery Rate per watt, either in cubic feet per minute per watt or in cubic metres per hour per watt.

For the product class of air cleaners with a Clean Air Delivery Rate greater than or equal to ten cubic feet per minute and less than one hundred cubic feet per minute, or in metric, greater than or equal to seventeen cubic metres per hour and less than one hundred and seventy cubic metres per hour, the Integrated Energy Factor must be greater than or equal to one point nine cubic feet per minute, or in metric, greater than or equal to three point two two cubic metres per watt per hour.

For the product class of air cleaners with a Clean Air Delivery Rate greater than or equal to one hundred cubic feet per minute and less than one hundred and fifty cubic feet per minute, or in metric, greater than or equal to one hundred and seventy cubic metres per hour and less than two hundred and fifty-five cubic metres per hour, the Integrated Energy Factor must be greater than or equal to two point four cubic feet per minute, or in metric, greater than or equal to four point zero seven cubic metres per watt per hour.

For the product class of air cleaners with a Clean Air Delivery Rate greater than or equal to one hundred and fifty cubic feet per minute, or in metric, greater than or equal to two hundred and fifty-five cubic metres per hour, the Integrated Energy Factor must be greater than or equal to two point nine cubic feet per minute, or in metric, greater than or equal to four point nine two cubic metres per watt per hour.

## Important dates

These modifications to the Regulations would come into force **six months** after the date of publication in the _Canada Gazette_, Part II.

NRCan is considering applying the new standards to air cleaners manufactured on or after **December 31, 2025**.

### Regulatory pathway

NRCan is considering amending the Regulations through Governor in Council amendment.

The considered changes would be pre-published in the _Canada Gazette_, Part I, followed by a public comment period. The exact date for final publication in the _Canada Gazette_, Part II will depend on the number and nature of comments received during the public comment period. Final publications are typically within a year of their initial public comment period. These changes and the timing of publication are subject to decision-making authorities under the _Energy Efficiency Act_.

## Labelling requirements

NRCan is considering introducing EnerGuide labelling requirements for air cleaners. The primary measurement on the EnerGuide label would be the **Clean Air Delivery Rate (CADR)/Watt (CADR/W)**.

The intent is that an EnerGuide label must be attached to every new air cleaner sold in Canada.

## Verification requirements

NRCan would require that air cleaners carry a **third-party verification mark** indicating that the product meets the energy efficiency standards and that information to be reported has been verified.

The verification mark is the mark of a Standards Council of Canada accredited certification body that operates an energy efficiency certification program for the product.

## Reporting requirements

### Energy efficiency report

The energy efficiency report for air cleaners would include the following information:

- **Clean Air Delivery Rate** with particulate diameter of 2.5 microns (PM. CADR), expressed in cfm or m/h.
- **Integrated Energy Factor** (PM. CADR/W), expressed in cfm/W or m/Wh.

The Regulations apply to products imported or shipped inter-provincially for sale or lease in Canada. This report must be submitted, by the dealer, to NRCan **before** the product is imported into Canada or traded inter-provincially for the first time.

### Import report

A dealer who imports these products into Canada would include the following information on the customs release document:

- **Name of product**, i.e., air cleaner
- **Model number**
- **Brand name**
- **Address of the dealer** importing the product
- **Purpose for which the product is being imported** (i.e., for sale or lease in Canada without modification; for sale or lease in Canada after modification to comply with energy efficiency standards; or for use as a component in a product being exported from Canada)

## Comments invited

The purpose of this bulletin is to provide stakeholders with the technical detail required to comment on the requirements under consideration for air cleaners.

NRCan is specifically interested in getting feedback on:

- The proposed definition and scope for air cleaners
- The presence of technologies to enhance the energy efficiency of air cleaners
- Data regarding annual energy use estimates for air cleaners

It is important to NRCan that we engage the public and stakeholders on amendments to the Regulations. If you are aware of any manufacturer, importer, retailer, utility provider, small business, consumer group, organization, or representative of a specific group(s) of the population (including, but not limited to, women, 2SLGBTQQIA+ people, persons with disabilities, visible minorities, socio-economic status, residency, housing status, etc.), Indigenous peoples/communities, and/or other person or group that may be interested in participating in the amendment discussion and/or may be negatively impacted by this proposal, please forward them or their representative this bulletin. Please click here to register to our [mailing list](https://nrcanequipmentdivision.powerappsportals.com/en-US/SubscribeMarketing/) which is used to notify stakeholders of upcoming amendments, technical bulletins, webinar registrations, official publication in the Canada Gazette, etc.

[Additional information on Canadas _Energy Efficiency Regulations_](http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/regulations-codes-standards/6861) including a current list of Standards Council of Canada accredited certification bodies can be found on the Departments website.

We welcome your comments by **September 13, 2024**. All correspondence should be forwarded to:

Natural Resources Canada
Office of Energy Efficiency
580 Booth Street
Ottawa, ON, K1A 0E4

**Email**: [EEregulations-reglementEE@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca](mailto:EEregulations-reglementEE@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca?subject=Bulletin%20%20air%20cleaners%20%20purificateurs%20dair%20-%20April%202024%20avril)

**Email subject**: Bulletin  air cleaners  purificateurs dair - May 2024 mai
