# Refrigerators

An ENERGY STAR certified fridge (refrigerator) **uses 9% less energy**, on average, than a standard model. Saving energy saves money and reduces your carbon footprint.

## Benefits of ENERGY STAR certified refrigerators

- A top-freezer refrigerator that is ENERGY STAR certified uses less energy than a 60-watt light bulb.
- Improvements in insulation and compressors contribute to energy savings.

## Refrigerator types

Refrigeration units fall into three main groups:

- **Models without automatic defrost**standard-size refrigerators and refrigerator-freezers
- **Models with automatic defrost**standard-size refrigerators and refrigerator-freezers
- **Compact models**refrigerators and refrigerator-freezers with total refrigerated volumes of less than 219.5 L (7.74 cu. ft.) and overall heights of less than 91.4 cm (36 in.)

For more information on types, see the energy efficiency standard table for [refrigerators, and refrigerator-freezers](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/refrigerators-refrigerator-freezers).

## The ENERGY STAR Promise

All ENERGY STAR certified products are tested to meet strict [efficiency specifications](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/technical-specifications?_ga=2.243074438.50817759.1643033387-820573303.1638557535) and are certified by an independent third party. They perform the same as or better than standard products without compromising performance in any way.

Start your research [using the ENERGY STAR Product Finder tool to find and compare](https://www.energystar.gov/productfinder/product/certified-residential-refrigerators/results?SetLanguage=English&NRCAN=on) certified refrigerators (You will be redirected to the U.S. ENERGY STAR website).

## Why should you choose ENERGY STAR?

- **Reduce your at-home energy consumption**
- **Save money**
- **Keep your home comfortable**
- **Reduce your carbon footprint**

## Tips for choosing an energy efficient refrigerator

- When you buy a new fridge, recycle the old one instead of reusing it elsewhere (even in the garage or at the cottage). An old refrigerator uses about 35% more energy, on average compared to a model that has earned the ENERGY STAR certification.
- When choosing between similar models, take a close look at the [EnerGuide](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/product-energy-ratings/energuide/appliances-energuide) label to learn how much energy theyll use each year and over the lifetime of the product. And remember the lower the number the better!
- Refrigerators that have earned the [ENERGY STAR Most Efficient](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star/products/energy-star-most-efficient) designation are the best of the best  theyll save you more energy than standard models.

## How to use your refrigerator efficiently

- **Position your fridge away from heat sources**. This includes ovens, dishwashers, heating vents and direct sunlight.
- **Set the fridge between 1.7 and 3.3C (35 and 38F) and the freezer at -18C (0F)**. These temperatures promote maximum efficiency and food safety.
- **Clean the condenser coils regularly**. Accumulated dust and pet hair can restrict airflow, causing the motor to work harder and use more energy.
- **Allow for airflow inside**. Avoid overfilling the fridge or freezer compartment.
- **Keep the door seals clean and tight**. If a sheet of paper placed in the door slides around or slips out, or if light from a flashlight placed inside can be seen through the seals, its time to replace the seals.

## Regulations set the energy efficiency minimum

Refrigerators, refrigerator freezers and miscellaneous refrigeration products such as coolers and wine chillers are subject to Canada's Energy Efficiency Regulations, which set a minimum performance standard for their energy efficiency. Find details in the [Guide to the Regulations](https://natural-resources.canada.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-efficiency-regulations/guide-canada-s-energy-efficiency-regulations).
