# Gas fireplaces

## Energy Efficiency Regulations

### Regulatory definition

**Gas fireplace**: A decorative gas fireplace or a heating gas fireplace.

*   **Decorative gas fireplace**: A vented fireplace that is fuelled by natural gas or propane, marked for decorative use only, and not equipped with a thermostat or intended for use as a heater.
*   **Heating gas fireplace**: A vented fireplace that is fuelled by natural gas or propane and is not a decorative gas fireplace.

#### Description of gas fireplaces:

Gas fireplaces are gas or propane burning appliances that provide a view of flames and can resemble solid fuel-burning fireplaces. Heat circulation can be by gravity or mechanical means. They may be freestanding, recessed, zero clearance, or insert units.

**Venting configurations**: Natural venting, direct venting, and powered venting.

**Ignition systems**: Gas fireplaces can be equipped with the following means of igniting the main burner:

*   **Continuous pilot**: A pilot intended to remain ignited continuously until manually interrupted.
*   **Intermittent pilot**: A pilot automatically ignited when the appliance operates, remaining ignited during main burner operation, and automatically extinguished when the main burner cycle is complete.
*   **On demand pilot**: A pilot intended to remain ignited for a predetermined period after main burner operation, automatically extinguished if no main burner operation occurs within that period.
*   **Remotely operated pilot**: A system providing remote initiation and extinguishment of the pilot ignition source, external to the gas safety combination control.

### Compliance date

**Manufactured on or after**: January 1, 2020

_For models manufactured prior to this date, refer to the Regulations._

### Compliant product models

*   [Gas fireplaces listed on NRCans searchable database](https://spl-lpi.nrcan-rncan.gc.ca/en-US/product/?product=GasFireplaces&page=1)

### Testing standard

*   **CAN/CSA P.4.1-15**

### Energy efficiency standard

| Product type                 | Minimum performance level fireplace efficiency, % | Prescriptive requirements                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| :--------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Decorative gas fireplaces** | None                                              | The product must be capable of:
    *   automatically extinguishing pilot flame when main gas burner flame is established;
    *   automatically extinguishing pilot flame when main gas burner flame is extinguished;
    *   if it has the capability of being manually switched to a mode of continuous pilot operation, preventing pilot flame from burning continuously for more than seven days; or
    *   in absence of any automatic or manual adjustment to main gas burner flame height or appearance, preventing any ignition source for the main gas burner flame from operating continuously for more than seven days.
|    *   Must have a direct vent configuration, unless it is marked for replacement use only.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| **Heating gas fireplaces**    | 50%                                              | The product must be capable of:
    *   automatically extinguishing pilot flame when main gas burner flame is established;
    *   automatically extinguishing pilot flame when main gas burner flame is extinguished;
    *   if it has the capability of being manually switched to a mode of continuous pilot operation, preventing pilot flame from burning continuously for more than seven days; or
|    *   in absence of any automatic or manual adjustment to main gas burner flame height or appearance, preventing any ignition source for the main gas burner flame from operating continuously for more than seven days.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

### Energy efficiency report requirements

*   **Name of product**
*   **Brand name**
*   **Model number**
*   **Manufacturer**
*   **Name of the certification body or province** whose verification mark will be on the product or its package
*   **Whether a mathematical model** as defined in the Regulations was used to generate any of the information provided below
*   **Type of fuel** it uses
*   **Maximum and minimum input rates**, expressed in kilowatts (British thermal units per hour BTU/h);
*   **Fireplace efficiency**
*   **Information that indicates whether the product is a decorative gas fireplace or a heating gas fireplace**
*   **Information that indicates whether it is intended for use as a replacement unit**
*   **Information that indicates whether it is freestanding, zero-clearance or an insert**
*   **Type of ignition system** it uses
*   **Venting configuration** the product has, namely, natural venting, direct venting or powered venting

_Sign in to the [Compliance Regulatory Energy Efficiency Database (CREED)](https://gc.auth.canada.ca/auth/gceab/p/l/authenticate?reqId=6dc80ce4ea7b1e9df0130ac18c3ca54b&la=eng) to download and submit an energy efficiency report for this product._

_This document does not constitute part of the Energy Efficiency Act (Act) or its associated regulations. This document is an administrative document that is intended to facilitate compliance by the regulated party with the Act and its associated regulations. This document is not intended to provide legal advice regarding the interpretation of the Act or its associated regulations. If a regulated party has questions about their legal obligations or responsibilities under the Act or its associated regulations, they should seek the advice of legal counsel._
